        The Dáil, Seanad and President
    




Seanad
                    The Seanad is the upper house of the Oireachtas (the Irish parliament). This document describes how it is elected, who may run to become a senator, and its functions.
                    



Dáil Éireann
                    Dáil Éireann is the lower house of the Oireachtas (the Irish parliament). This document describes how it operates, who can be elected as a TD, and outlines what is meant by Dáil privilege, PQs and dissolution of the Dáil.
                    



President of Ireland
                    The President of Ireland (Uachtarán na hÉireann) is the head of State. The President's role and functions are set out in the Constitution.
                    



Legislation
                    This document describes how laws are made by the Oireachtas     (the Irish parliament).
                    



Private Members' Bills
                    Private Members' Bills are proposals for legislation initiated by members of the Dáil or Seanad.
                    



President's Award - Gaisce
                    The President's Award is the President's National Challenge Award for young people in Ireland between the ages of 15 and 25. Find out how to achieve a Bronze, Silver or Gold Gaisce award.
                    

     



Office of the Ombudsman
                    The main duty of the Irish Ombudsman is to investigate     complaints made by members of the public about how they have been treated by     public bodies in Ireland.
                    



Comptroller and Auditor General
                    The Comptroller and Auditor General carries out an audit   each year of the State's accounts.
                    



Public petitions
                    Members of the public can raise issues of general public interest or public policy with the Houses of the Oireachtas.
                    



Regulation of lobbying
                    The Register of Lobbying is maintained by the Standards in Public Office Commission. Find out who is required to register.
                    



Rights Tribunals
                    Rights Tribunals are tribunals that make binding decisions     about the rights of people in Ireland.
                    



Unconstitutional legislation
                    The High Court has the power to cancel any law or part of any law that is unconstitutional. Discusses what constitutes unconstitutional legislation and how legislation is judged to be unconstitutional.
                    



Judicial review of public decisions
                    Administrative decisions may be judicially reviewed by the High Court to determine whether they are illegal. Find out how to initiate judicial review proceedings.
                    



Access to environmental information
                            You have the right to access certain information about the environment and pollutants that may affect it. Find out how to access environmental information.
                            



The Government is the group of senior ministers responsible for the executive power of the State. This means that the Government is responsible for giving effect to laws. You can view this list of current Government Ministers.Executive power includes the power to execute or carry out laws with the assistance of the civil service, police force and military. The head of Government is the Taoiseach, who is nominated by the Dáil. The Taoiseach nominates a deputy (the Tánaiste) and a cabinet of ministers to take responsibility for the departments of government.The Government decides major questions of policy and carries out a number of different and important functions.
 
How the Government is formed

After a general election, the Dáil (the Irish parliament) elects the Taoiseach. Normally the Taoiseach is the leader of the largest party in the Dail. If no one party has a majority of TDs (members of the Dáil), a number of parties may come together to form a coalition government.The Taoiseach then nominates a deputy (the Tánaiste) and a cabinet of ministers who take charge of the departments of government.The acting Taoiseach (the Taoiseach of the former Government) may have to ask the President to dissolve the Dáil and call another general election if no Government can be formed.The composition of the GovernmentArticle 28 of Bunreacht na hÉireann (the Irish Constitution) sets out the composition of Government. The Constitution states that the Government must not be smaller than 7 members or larger than 15 members.The members of the Government must be members of either Dáil Éireann or Seanad Éireann. There cannot be more than 2 members of Seanad Éireann appointed to the Government. The Taoiseach, the Tánaiste and the Minister for Finance must be members of Dáil Éireann.The Taoiseach may also appoint Ministers of State who are also known as Junior Ministers. They are not actually members of the Cabinet but they help Government ministers in their parliamentary and departmental work.The Taoiseach also appoints an Attorney General to advise the Government on legal issues. The Attorney General is not a member of the Government but they traditionally attend Cabinet meetings.Coalition governmentsIf, after a general election, no party can get the support of the majority of the members of the Dáil, 2 or more parties may agree to work together as a coalition government.The coalition parties agree on who will be nominated as Taoiseach. Usually, it is the leader of the larger party. In recent years, the leader of the smaller party has been usually nominated as Tánaiste.The ministerial portfolios are then shared between the parties. Usually the larger party is given a greater number of portfolios. The leader of each party decides which elected members of the party to give those portfolios to.The coalition government remains in power for as long as it keeps the support of the majority of the Dáil. If the coalition parties find that they cannot agree and can no longer work together, the Taoiseach may advise the President to dissolve the Dáil.
 
The Taoiseach

The Taoiseach is the head of the Government. Taoiseach means ‘leader’ or ‘chief’ in Irish, but the Irish word is always used for referring to the head of Government in Ireland.The Taoiseach acts as a channel of communication between the Government and the President. They advise the President about summoning and dissolving the Dáil. They present Bills (or proposals for legislation) to the President for signature so that they can become Acts with legal effect. The Taoiseach also keeps the President generally informed on domestic and international policy matters.As the leading public figure in the Government, the Taoiseach also acts as a spokesperson for the Government on major policy issues and chairs Cabinet meetings.They take an interest in the affairs of all the Departments of State and make sure that the plans of departments are co-ordinated. They make sure that Cabinet decisions are carried out by the ministers and that the ministers fully understand the implications of different Government policies.The Taoiseach also has a major role to play in our relations with foreign countries. They represent Ireland abroad and regularly meets with the other heads of state of the European Union to help shape European policy. The Taoiseach is Ireland’s representative on the European Council.The Taoiseach and all the ministers are answerable to Dáil Eireann. The Taoiseach is assisted in his or her duties by the Government Chief Whip.
 
The Tánaiste

The Tánaiste is the deputy Taoiseach.They act in place of the Taoiseach if the Taoiseach is abroad or ill. If the Taoiseach dies or becomes permanently incapacitated, the Tanaiste would stand in until a new Taoiseach was appointed.The Tánaiste may also hold a ministerial portfolio, which means that they may also be a minister of a Department of State.Like the other members of the Government, the Tánaiste may be dismissed by the Taoiseach if they consider that there is sufficient reason to do so.
 
The Government Chief Whip

The Government Chief Whip is the Minister of State for the Department of the Taoiseach. They are responsible for the organisation and co-ordination of Government business in Dáil Éireann.The Chief Whip acts as a channel of communication between the Government and the opposition parties.The Chief Whip is also responsible for making sure that the Government has a voting majority in the Dáil by making sure that TDs attend Dáil sessions when a vote is being taken. To instruct a TD to attend to vote, he or she can issue a whip.If a Government TD votes against the Government, they may lose the whip. This means that they are suspended from the party. The Taoiseach can decide to restore a TD’s whip.The Chief Whip has a function in monitoring the progress made by Government departments in preparing legislation. They also arrange for the proposed legislation to be considered and debated in the Dáil.
 
Ministers and Government departments

Each minister of the Government is responsible for running and managing the department they have been allocated. There are 18 government departments. As well as the Cabinet minister assigned to the department, The Taoiseach may also appoint junior ministers, or Ministers of State to help run departments.Each department employs a large number of civil servants, including a Secretary General, who remain in their positions regardless of changes in the Government. These officials advise and assist the minister in the running of the department.You can find out about government spending in each of these departments on whereyourmoneygoes.gov.ie. You can also read about the responsibilities of the people who manage government departments on whodoeswhat.gov.ie.
 
What do government ministers do?

The minister is responsible for their department and the Taoiseach can remove a minister at any time. Ministers are part of the Government and sit at cabinet meetings, where decisions about government policy and proposals for new Government bills are decided.The minister may suggest and propose new or amended legislation to the Government relating to matters that arise in their department.Ministers also have a power to make Statutory Instruments which are also known as delegated or secondary legislation. A Minister may only make a Statutory Instrument if they are permitted to do so in primary legislation. For example, the Immigration Act 2004 gives the Minister for Justice the power to make an order adding or removing a country from the list of countries whose citizens need a visa to enter Ireland.You can view all Irish Government legislation from 1922 onwards.
 
Departments and services

There are 18 government departments. Each department is controlled by a minister of state.Department of Agriculture, Food and the MarineRegulates the agriculture and marine sectorsOperates schemes and delivers supports to people who work in these sectorsMaintains a register of food business operatorsRuns the Green, Low-Carbon, Agri-Environment Scheme (GLAS)Operates the Forest Service and issues forest licencesControls the entrance to Ireland of animalsYou can read more about the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine on its website.Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and YouthResponsible for the Child and Family Agency (TUSLA), which oversees child welfare in IrelandOperates the Early Childhood Care and Education Programme (ECCE) and the National Childcare SchemeFunds local Family Resource CentresOperates the Irish Youth Justice ServiceOperates the International Protection Accommodation Service (IPAS)You can read more about the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth on its website.Department of DefenceResponsible for the Irish Army, Air Corps and NavyResponsible for the Civil DefenceRuns the Office of Emergency PlanningDepartment of EducationResponsible for education policy in IrelandOperates the Higher Education AuthorityOperates the State Examinations CommissionOperates the Teaching CouncilOperates SolasYou can read more about the Department of Education on its website.Department of Enterprise, Trade and EmploymentPromotes investment in Ireland through the IDASupports businesses through grants and fundingAssesses applications for employment permitsYou can read more about the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment on its website.Department of Environment, Climate and CommunicationsResponsible for the Government’s plans to tackle climate changeResponsible for postal services and EircodesOversees home energy grants through the Sustainable Energy Authority of IrelandLicences and regulates industry through the Environmental Protection AgencyYou can read more about the Department of Environment, Climate and Communications on its website.Department of FinanceSets the annual budgetOversees the Revenue CommissionerOversees the State’s shareholdings in financial servicesYou can read more about the Department of Finance on its website.Department of Foreign AffairsPromotes Ireland internationallyRuns Irish consulates and embassies abroadOversees the Passport ServiceProvides consular services for Irish people living abroadYou can read more about the Department of Foreign Affairs on its website.Department of Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and ScienceResponsible for further education policy and fundingOversees the recognition of foreign qualificationsYou can read more about the Department of Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science on its website.Department of HealthResponsible for health policy in IrelandFunds the HSEPromotes healthier lifestyles and policies to improve the health of people in IrelandIssues Medical Cards and GP visit cards through the HSEYou can read more about the Department of Health on its website.Department of Housing, Local Government and HeritageOversees the Residential Tenancies BoardOversees local governmentResponsible for public housing policyYou can read more about the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage on its website.Department of JusticeOversees the Courts ServiceOversees Immigration Service Delivery and the International Protection OfficeResponsible for national security and intelligenceYou can read more about the Department of Justice on its website.Department of Public Expenditure, NDP Delivery and ReformOversees government spendingPromotes reform across the civil and public serviceCo-ordinates the Office of the Government Chief Information Officer (OGCIO) which has responsibility for the government’s digital servicesOversees the delivery of the National Development Plan, Project Ireland 2040, to support expected population growth through development of infrastructure, jobs, homes and amenitiesYou can read more about the Department of Public Expenditure, NDP Delivery and Reform on its website.Department of Rural and Community DevelopmentOversees a range of programmes intended to promote social integration and sustainable community developmentBodies overseen by the Department include Irish Water, Pobal, and the Charities RegulatorYou can read more about the Department of Rural and Community Development on its website.Department of Social ProtectionProvides income supports, such as Jobseeker’s Benefit and Illness BenefitOperates employment support services, such as the Community Employment programme and TúsInvestigates fraud and abuse in the social protection systemYou can read more about the Department of Social Protection on its website.Department of the TaoiseachWorks with other government departments to implement policy, primarily through the cabinet committee structureResponsible for liaising with the President and the Houses of the Oireachtas on behalf of the governmentYou can read more about the Department of the Taoiseach on its website.Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and MediaSupports the tourism industry in increasing revenue and employmentOversees programmes to promote Ireland’s culture and artsPromotes use of the Irish language among the general public and supports the development of the GaeltachtPromotes sports participation among general public and develops high performance facilities for elite athletesDevelops broadcasting and media policy and oversees organisations such as RTÉ, TG4, and Coimisiún na Meán (which replaced  the Broadcasting Authority of Ireland from 15 March 2023)You can read more about the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media on its website.Department of TransportOversees the work of a range of agencies responsible for the development and operation of Ireland’s transport infrastructureBodies overseen by the Department include the National Transport Authority, the Road Safety Authority (RSA), the Coast Guard and the Air Accident Investigation Unit (AAIU)You can read more about the Department of Transport on its website.


Civil Service
    

The civil service carries out the work of Government and delivers public services. Civil servants are the permanent staff of departments of state, but they may also work for other public bodies.The Constitution of Ireland does not mention the civil service but it is vital to the functioning of the state.The Civil Service Code of Standards and Behaviour says that the mission of the civil service is the achievement of an excellent service for the Government and the other institutions of State, as well as for the public as citizens and users of public services.Recruitment to the civil and public serviceThe Public Appointments Service provides recruitment, assessment and selection services for the civil service. They also provide recruitment and consultancy services to local authorities, the Health Service Executive , An Garda Síochána and other public bodies.The Commission for Public Service Appointments is a separate body. The Commission sets standards, which it publishes as codes of practice, for recruitment and selection to the civil service, An Garda Síochána and a number of public service bodies, including the Health Service Executive.
 
What does the civil service do?

The civil service has three main functions: It advises the Government on the implementation of policy and is responsible for implementing agreed policy, It helps prepare and draft new legislation and It helps the Government to run the country according to the legislation passed by the Oireachtas.Each Department of State has a permanent staff consisting of administrative, professional, specialist and technical employees. The head civil servant of each Department is the Secretary General, who is recommended by the Minister for that Department and appointed for a period of 7 years by the Government.Below the Secretary General, there are a number of Assistant Secretaries, who are each responsible for specific areas of work in the Department. Below the Assistant Secretaries, there are many officials at varying levels of seniority who are graded according to their seniority.
 
Working for the civil service

The Public Appointments Service provides recruitment, assessment and selection services for the civil service. They also provide recruitment and consultancy services to local authorities, the Health Service Executive , An Garda Síochána and other public bodies. Civil and public service jobs are advertised on publicjobs.ie.The Commission for Public Service Appointments sets standards, which it publishes as codes of practice, for recruitment and selection to the civil service, An Garda Síochána and a number of public service bodies, including the Health Service Executive.
 
Civil servants and public servants

Civil servants are the branch of the public service that works directly for the Government in government departments or in certain state agencies which carry out functions on behalf of the State, but which are independent of Government. For example, those who fall work in the Central Bank of Ireland and the Revenue Commissioners are civil servants of the State.All civil servants are also public servants. However, the public service covers a much broader range of professions which are paid for by the State. This includes many teachers, doctors, nurses, gardaí and employees of other agencies that provide state services to the public.
 
Fundamental rights under the Irish Constitution

The Irish Constitution recognises and declares that people living in Ireland have certain fundamental personal rights.Articles 40 to 44 set out these fundamental rights. Many of the rights apply to everyone living in Ireland, including non-Irish citizens.The rights that are set out in these articles have been interpreted by the courts, and some articles have been amended since the Constitution was written in 1937. The courts have found that some rights are protected by the Constitution, even though they are not explicitly mentioned in the text.Fundamental rights are not absolute - they can be limited or restricted by the Oireachtas for certain reasons (for the common good or to keep public order for example).If there is a conflict between two or more constitutional rights in a case, the courts will look at all the circumstances and weigh all of the factors to decide how that particular conflict is to be dealt with. For instance, there is often a clash between one person’s right to freedom of expression and another person’s right to their good name.
 
Personal rights

Article 40 sets out ‘personal rights’, including:Equality before the lawAll citizens shall be held equal before the law (Article 40.1 of the Constitution). This means that the State cannot unjustly, unreasonably or arbitrarily discriminate between citizens. You cannot be treated as inferior or superior to any other person in society simply because of your human attributes or your ethnic, racial, social or religious background.However, when the State is making laws, it may consider differences of capacity and of social function between individuals in society.Right to lifeThe Constitution specifically recognises and protects your right to life (Article 40.4).Your right to life also means the right to have nature take its course and to die a natural death. That does not mean that you have the right to have your life terminated or death unnaturally accelerated.In May 2018, the people voted in a referendum to allow the Oireachtas to pass laws regulating the termination of pregnancy. The Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018 was signed into law on 20 December 2018.Personal libertyThe Constitution guarantees that you have a right to liberty and freedom, except in accordance with the law (Article 40.4).This means that, in general, you are entitled to your own personal freedom except where regulated by law. In addition, the law may provide for your detention in certain circumstances and the State may only breach your right to personal liberty in circumstances that come within that law.If you believe that you are being detained or held unlawfully, you can make an application to the High Court. If the person or institution detaining you cannot justify your detention or prove that it is lawful, the High Court may order that you be released. This is called a habeas corpus order.You have a right to move freely within the State. You also have a broader right to travel and to get a passport for the purpose of travelling.Your right to a passport may be restricted or limited. For example, before granting you bail, a court may require you to hand over your passport. The State may also restrict your right to travel abroad for the purposes of national security.Freedom of expressionYou have a right to freely express your convictions and opinions (Article 40.6.1.i). However, that right can be limited in the interests of public order and morality. You can also not use this right to defame someone else as this would interfere their constitutional right to a good name.The Constitution also states that it is an offence to publish or utter seditious (material undermining the authority of the State or advocating for the overthrow of the State) or indecent material.Following a referendum in May 2018, the Thirty-seventh Amendment of the Constitution (Repeal of offence of publication or utterance of blasphemous matter) Act 2018 was passed. Blasphemy is no longer a constitutional offence.The State is also obliged by the Constitution to make sure that media such as the radio, the press and the cinema are not used to undermine public order or morality or the authority of the State. For example, the Censorship of Publications Acts and the Censorship of Films Acts allow censorship of publications like books, films and DVDs.Freedom of assemblyYou have a right to assemble or meet peacefully and without weapons (Article 40.6.1.ii). This right is limited by legislation to protect public order and morality. The law prevents or controls meetings that are calculated or designed to cause a riot or breach of the peace or which may be a danger to the general public.There are other limitations on your freedom of assembly. You cannot meet on private property without the consent of the owner - that is trespass. Parades and processions are not illegal but it is a public nuisance to obstruct a highway without authorisation.You may not hold a procession or meeting within half a mile of the Houses of the Oireachtas when a chief superintendent or higher ranking garda informs the organisers of such an event that it is prohibited or where any garda within that half-mile radius asks you to disperse.Freedom of associationThe Constitution guarantees your right to form associations and unions (Article 40.6.1.iii). You may form any type of association for whatever purpose you choose, whether it is sporting, social, charitable, commercial or political.This right is limited by legislation to protect public order and morality. For example, associations formed for the purpose of treason or some anti-constitutional or illegal purpose cannot rely on this right to freedom of association.Similarly, you can’t force someone to join any particular association or union or always force a union or association to accept you.The right to fair proceduresThe courts and all public bodies or persons making decisions that affect your constitutional rights must treat you fairly. Two of the essential components of fair procedures in this context are:The person making the decision that affects you should not be biased or appear to be biased.You must be given an adequate opportunity to present your case. You must be informed of the matter and you must be given a chance to comment on the material put forward by the other side.Bodily integrityYou have a right not to have your body or person unjustifiably interfered with. A person can only interfere with your body with a valid justification and in a proportionate manner. Similarly, you have a right not to be subjected to torture, inhumane or degrading treatment.If you are in custody, you have a right not to have your health endangered while in prison.Trial by juryYour constitutional right to trial by jury only exists in certain criminal cases.If you have been charged with a "non-minor" offence, you will be tried by a judge sitting with a jury. There are some offences for which you will be given a choice - whether you want to have your case decided by a District Court judge sitting alone or by a judge sitting with a jury.The jury must consist of those who have been chosen at random from a diverse range of jurors from the community.The right to privacyThe Constitution does not specifically state a right to privacy but the courts recognise that the personal rights in the Constitution imply the right to privacy. It has sometimes been described as the right “to be let alone” in private settings.For example, your private written communications and telephone conversations cannot be deliberately, consciously and unjustifiably interfered with. Your rights to cast a secret ballot in elections and to the confidentiality of medical details are other examples of the right to privacy in action.However, your right to privacy may be limited or restricted by legislation in the interests of the common good, public order and morality.The right to earn a livelihoodAs a citizen, you have a right to work and to earn a living, whether you are male or female. However, that general right doesn’t mean that you can insist on being employed in a particular role or area or by a particular employer.The State has a general duty to protect your right to work and earn a livelihood from unjust attack.Inviolability of a citizen's dwellingThe Constitution declares that the dwelling of a citizen is inviolable and shall not be entered forcibly except in accordance with the law (Article 40.5). This means that no one, including the Gardaí, may enter the place where you live without a warrant or other legal authority to enter.If you are arrested as a result of an unlawful entry into your home, your arrest is illegal. Evidence obtained as a result of an unlawful entry onto your dwelling may be inadmissible in court.
 
The rights of the family

The family founded on marriage possesses a collection of constitutional rights (Article 41 and 42). These include:The right to marital privacy.The right of coupes to make their own decisions about family planning.The right to consort together, to enjoy each other's company and to procreate. This right may be limited or restricted where a family member is in prison or where one spouse is not an Irish citizen. The right of parents to be the main and natural educators of their children. The State must respect your right as parents to provide for the religious, moral, intellectual, physical and social education of your children. The State cannot oblige you to send your children to school or to any particular type of school but it may require that children receive a certain minimum education.The right to free primary education - this means that the State must contribute towards for your children's primary education. State aid for schools must not discriminate between schools of different religions.The right to decide the religion of your children. The State cannot interfere with this right.Many of these rights equally apply to non-marital families.There is a constitutional principle that married parents have equal rights to and are joint guardians of their children. If the parents separate or divorce, the courts may decide who will have custody of the children. The paramount consideration is the welfare of the children.The rights of childrenArticle 42A was added to the Constitution in 2015. It affirms children’s natural and imprescriptible rights and the State’s duty to uphold these rights. Children have the right for their best interests to be of paramount consideration where the State seeks to intervene to protect their safety and welfare.This right applies in all court proceedings concerning adoption, guardianship, custody, and access. In these proceedings, children also have the right to have their views ascertained and considered by the courts. The courts are to have regard to a child’s age and maturity when considering their views in accordance with this right.Upcoming referendums on family and careTwo constitutional referendums will be held on 8 March 2024 to amend the Constitution.You can find information about the proposed changes to the Constitution.The General Scheme of the Amendment of the Constitution Bill 2023 has been published, which is draft legislation for these proposed amendments.
 
Property rights

The Constitution declares that the State will vindicate the property rights of every citizen. This means that you have a right to own, transfer and inherit property. You also have the right to bequeath property upon your death. The State guarantees to pass no law to abolish these rights.Article 43 acknowledges that these rights ought to be regulated by the principles of social justice. This means that the State may pass laws limiting your right to private property in the interests of the common good. The most common form of limitation is taxation on ownership, transfer and inheritance.Other examples of restrictions or limitations on your right to own property include town and regional planning, protection of national monuments, compulsory acquisition of land.If the State passes a law that otherwise restricts your property rights, it may be required to compensate you for this restriction.
 
Religious freedom

Article 44 of the Constitution deals with religion.You are free to practise your religion and your freedom of conscience. The State guarantees not to endow or favour any religion and not to discriminate on the grounds of religion.State aid for schools cannot discriminate between schools of different religious denominations. Every child has the right to attend a denominational school receiving State funding without having to participate in religious instruction in the school.Your right to religious liberty may be limited to protect public order and morality.


The Irish Constitution


The Irish Constitution (or Bunreacht na hÉireann) was ratified by the Irish people in 1937. It is the fundamental law of the State.Every part of the Constitution is set out in both the Irish and English languages. Article 8 states that the Irish language is the first official language and that the English language is recognised as a second official language.The Constitution establishes the branches or organs of government, it establishes the courts and sets out how those institutions should be run. It also describes the fundamental rights of every Irish citizen.The Constitution is also part of a wider human rights framework in Ireland. This refers to all legal and other human rights commitments made by Ireland, including treaties under the United Nations, the European Convention on Human Rights and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
 
Structure of the Constitution

The Constitution contains 50 articles.Articles 1-39 define the functions of the State and its agencies and set out the separation of powers in the State.Articles 40-44 provide for the fundamental rights of Irish citizens.The remaining articles are:Article 45, which sets out directive principles of social policyArticle 46, which sets out how the Constitution may be amendedArticle 47, which governs referendumsArticles 48-50, which repealed the previous Constitution (of Saorstát Éireann) and ensured the continuance of laws
 
The Constitution and legislation

One of the most important Articles of the Constitution is Article 15.4, which states that the Oireachtas must not enact any law that is repugnant to the Constitution (conflicts with the Constitution). This means that the Constitution is superior to all other law.If any element of an existing law is found to be repugnant to the Constitution, that element of the law is invalid (Article 15.4.2).If a proposed new law would be repugnant to the Constitution, it cannot be enacted unless the Constitution has been amended accordingly – see 'Amending the Constitution' below.Article 25 provides that Bills passed by both houses of the Oireachtas should be presented to the President for signature. Once a Bill has been signed by the President, it becomes law. However, Article 26 provides that the President may refer the Bill to the Supreme Court to decide if it is repugnant to the Constitution. The President will not sign the Bill into law if the Supreme Court decides against it.Every law that is enacted is presumed to be constitutional until it is proven not to be. The High Court has the power or jurisdiction to cancel any law or part of any law that is repugnant to the Constitution.
 
Amending the Constitution

The consent of the Irish people is needed before the Constitution can be amended. This means that amendments to the Constitution can only be made by way of a constitutional referendum. Up to 2023, 38 constitutional referendums had been held, of which 32 resulted in amendments to the Constitution. A list of the amending Acts is at the front of the Constitution published on irishstatutebook.ie.If no petition challenging the result is presented to the High Court within 7 days of its publication, the certificate becomes final. The President will then sign the Bill to change the Constitution and the Constitution will be amended. Upcoming referendums on family and careTwo constitutional referendums will be held on 8 March 2024 to amend the Constitution.You can find information about the proposed changes to the Constitution.The General Scheme of the Amendment of the Constitution Bill 2023 has been published, which is draft legislation for these proposed amendments.
 
Further information

You can access a full copy of the Constitution on irishstatutebook.ie. You may also order a copy from the Government Publications Office and it is available in bookshops nationwide.If you feel that your constitutional rights are being violated, you may wish to engage a solicitor. The Law Society of Ireland has a list of all solicitors who hold a current practising certificate.The Free Legal Advice Centres (FLAC) operate a nationwide network of legal advice clinics. These clinics are confidential, free of charge and open to all.

Main institutions of the Irish State
   
Introduction

Ireland is a constitutional republic, which means that the fundamental rules that determine how the State behaves, how laws are made, and how power should be used are set out in a written constitution.It also means that the people of Ireland elect who they want to represent them, govern them, and make laws on their behalf.The Irish Constitution establishes and describes the main institutions of the State. The power to run the State is divided into 3 separate branches:
The Legislature (or legislative branch)
The Executive (or executive branch)
The Judiciary (or judicial branch)
The Constitution tries to keep these powers separate to guarantee that there is not too much power in the hands of one institution of the State.
 
Separation of powers

The Irish Constitution says that all of the power of the State comes from
the Irish people. It also says that that the power to govern is divided between the
Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary.The Legislature has law-making power. Only the Oireachtas (the national parliament),
with the President
as its head, can make laws in Ireland. See ‘The Legislature' below.The Executive has the power to enforce the law, run the departments of the
State and set the agenda of the Oireachtas. The Government,
led by the Taoiseach, has the executive power of the State. See ‘The
Executive’ below.The Judiciary has the power to interpret the law. The Irish courts system has this power, which includes
the power to decide if a piece of legislation or law is
unconstitutional. See ‘The Judiciary’ below.The Constitution sets out how these state powers should work, and puts in
place checks and balances to prevent institutions from having too much
power.
 
The Legislature

The legislative power is the power to make laws. The Oireachtas does this
through introducing and changing legislation.
Articles 15 to
27 of the Constitution give this power to the national parliament or the
Oireachtas. The Oireachtas comprises The Dáil, The Seanad and The President.
The main function of the Oireachtas is to make new laws and amend existing
laws. New laws start as Bills, and must be debated by the Dáil and Seanad and
passed by both Houses before the President can sign the bill into law. If the
Seanad does not pass a bill, the Dáil can still enter the bill into law, but
must pass a resolution declaring that the Bill is deemed to have been passed by
both Houses. When a bill becomes law, it is known as an Act of the
Oireachtas.Any sitting TD (Teachta Dála, the name given to elected members of
the Dáil) or Senator can publish a Bill and try to have it passed by the
House, but the Bill must have the Government’s support if it involves
spending public money.The President has the power to refer a bill to the Supreme Court to
seek a judgment that the law is constitutional.TDs are elected in general
elections, which must be held at least every 5 years. Senators are either
appointed by the Taoiseach, or elected in Seanad elections, which take place
after a general election has been held.The Oireachtas also elects the Government and passes budgets for Government
Departments.
 
The Executive

Article
28 of the Constitution gives executive power to the
Government.Executive power includes the power to execute or carry out laws with the
assistance of the civil service,
police force and military. The head of Government is the Taoiseach, who is
nominated by the Dáil.
The Taoiseach nominates a deputy (the Tánaiste) and a cabinet of ministers to
take responsibility for the Departments of
Government.The Government is usually formed by the largest party in the Dáil after a
general
election. A Government formed from two or more parties is called a coalition
government.The Government must have at least 7 members (which must include the
Taoiseach, the Tánaiste and the Minister for Finance), and at most 15 members.
A maximum of 2 senators can be appointed as Ministers.The Government is answerable to Dáil
Éireann, and will not survive without the support of the majority of
TDs.
 
The Judiciary 

The judicial power is the power to interpret and apply the law to disputes
and conflicts that arise between the State and the individual and disputes and
conflicts that arise between individuals. Articles 34 to 37 of
the Constitution give this power to the courts.Under Article 35,
judges of the courts are independent of the Government and can only be removed
through a resolution of both houses of the Oireachtas for misbehaviour or
incapacity.Judges are appointed by the President,
who acts on the advice of the Government. The Judicial Appointments Advisory Board advises the
Government on suitable candidates for the bench.

Local government
    

Ireland has 31 local authorities that are responsible for a range of local services, including:HousingRoadsRecreation and amenitiesPlanningLibrariesEnvironmental protectionFire servicesRegister of electorsMost (26) local authorities are county councils. There are also 3 city councils (Dublin, Galway and Cork) and 2 councils that oversee a city and a county (Limerick and Waterford).Voters elect councillors to represent them at local level. You can read about how members of local authorities are elected in a range of different languages.Ireland currently has 949 elected councillors. They make policy decisions at council meetings. Local councils are managed by a chief executive who oversees the day-to-day running of the council.Local authorities are recognised in Article 28A of the Constitution of Ireland, which guarantees that local elections are held at least every 5 years.
 
What does the local authority do?

Local authorities have a number of important functions.HousingLocal authorities are the main providers of social housing for people who cannot afford their own accommodation. They own a stock of accommodation and rent houses and apartments to eligible applicants. They are also responsible for maintaining the accommodation. You can read more about Applying for local authority housing.Local authorities provide social housing support through the Housing Assistance Payment (HAP).Local authorities also enforce minimum standards in private rented accommodation.PlanningLocal authorities oversee planning permission. New buildings, some extensions to existing buildings, and changing the purpose or use of a building (for example, changing a shop into a restaurant) must have planning permission.RoadsLocal authorities are responsible for improving and maintaining regional and local roads. They are also responsible for:Public parking servicesTraffic wardensSetting speed limits on local and national roadsMaintaining street lightingTrimming hedges and treesDrainageGritting roads during very cold weatherLocal authorities also have a Road Safety Officer to promote the safe use of roads in the local area.Fire servicesLocal authorities operate fire services with the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage playing an advisory and policy-making role.Libraries, recreation services and amenitiesLocal authorities operate a network of public libraries in Ireland. Public libraries are open to everyone and most of their services are free.Local authorities also provide funding to local youth, arts and sports services, as well as maintaining and operating public swimming pools, leisure centres and playgrounds.Many public amenities, like parks and monuments, are maintained by local authoritiesEnvironmental protection and animal controlLocal authorities play an important role in protecting the environment including:Issuing licences for industrial waste disposalIssuing licences for industrial air emissionsCollecting domestic, commercial and other waste, and granting licences to private companies to collect wasteIssuing dog licences, appointing dog wardens, providing dog shelters and taking court action against dog owners where necessaryIssuing licences to horse owners in areas that are designated as control areas for horsesLocal authorities also have a role in enforcing noise pollution laws.Register of electorsThe local authority must put together and maintain a list of voters in its area.You can find details of all local authority services in your area, at the Local Government Services site.
 
Elected councillors

The members of each local authority are called 'councillors'. Councillors are directly elected in local elections. The number of councillors elected to each local authority depends on the population of the local authority area.Local elections by law are held in the month of May or June on a day fixed by the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage Each councillor holds office for 5 years, Councillors elected in May 2019 will hold office until 7 days after the polling day in 2024.The number of members of each local authority is fixed by law. This means that Schedule 7 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended by Section 15 of the Local Government Reform Act 2014, has set down the number of members of every county council, city council and city and county council throughout the country.The Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage may divide each city or county area into smaller local electoral areas and may fix the number of councillors that can be elected for each of these electoral areas.Before making changes to an electoral area, the Minister requests a boundary committee to prepare a report of recommendations. View the most recent boundary committee reports.What do councillors do?Councillors make decisions at council meetings. There are 4 different types of meetings held by the local authority:An annual meeting (held in May/June each year)Ordinary meetings (usually held at least monthly)A budget meeting (usually towards the end of the year)A special meeting (held occasionally)At the council meeting, every councillor is entitled to vote for or against resolutions put forward at the meeting. In most cases, a resolution is passed where the majority of the members present vote in favour of the resolution.Resolutions and bye-lawsLocal authorities make decisions about policies by passing ‘resolutions’. Resolutions are passed by councillors and are known as reserved functions of the local authority. Resolutions can include:Decisions about annual budgetsHousing policyEnvironmental protection policiesLocal authorities can pass laws where they are empowered to do so by the Oireachtas (the Irish parliament). These laws are called bye-laws and are often used to regulate:Parking zones and parking finesLitter controlThe control of horses and dogsTwo months before making a Bye-Law, the local authority must publish a notice in a local newspaper indicating that it proposes to make the Bye-Law. The public is entitled to inspect the proposed Bye-Law and make submissions about it before it comes into effect.The Cathaoirleach of the local authorityEvery year, the local authority elects a Cathaoirleach (Chairperson) and a leas-Cathaoirleach (vice-chairperson) from the elected councillors. The Cathaoirleach chairs meetings of the local authority.In some areas, the Cathaoirleach is called the Lord Mayor or Mayor and the leas-Cathaoirleach is called the Deputy Lord Mayor or Deputy Mayor:Lord Mayor and Deputy Lord Mayor – Cork City Council and Dublin City CouncilMayor and Deputy Mayor – Limerick City and County Council, Waterford City and County Council, and Galway City Council
 
The role of the chief executive

Every local authority has a chief executive (formerly called a county or city manager) who is employed to manage their local authority. Some local authorities share a chief executive. As well as the chief executive, some councils also have deputy chief executives.The chief executive performs the executive functions of the city council, county council or city and county council. They supervise, co-ordinate, manage and pay the employees and officers of the council. They also makes contracts on behalf of the council and affixes the official seal of the council on documents.Once appointed, the chief executive will remain in office for a term of 7 years (although this can also be extended by an additional 3 years).The chief executive makes decisions on the running of the local authority, except those that are reserved decisions (decisions that are made by the elected councillors). These include:Granting or refusing planning permissionAllocating local authority housingSigning contractsManaging the staff of the local authorityThe day to day running of the local authority
 
Regional assemblies

Regional assemblies make decisions about strategic planning, EU funding and
they help co-ordinate the work of local authorities.Ireland has 3 regional assemblies. Each assembly has members who are elected
by the local authorities in the region. The 3 regions are:
Northern and Western region
Eastern and Midlands region
Southern region
These regional assemblies were created under the Local
Government Reform Act 2014 and have been in operation since 1 January
2015.
 
What do regional assemblies do?

The aim of the assemblies is to co-ordinate, promote and support
strategic planning and sustainable development and make local
government and public services more effective.Strategic planning means planning the direction or goals for the region, and
making decisions on how to use funding and resources. Regional assemblies make
it easier for local authorities to work together to benefit the region.Economic and spatial planningRegional assemblies plan how to use the land and resources in the region
over a long period. They have developed Regional Spatial and Economic
Strategies as part of the government’s long term plans to meet the challenges
of population growth, climate change and a competitive economy.EU FundingRegional assemblies manage certain EU funding programmes like the European Regional
Development Fund, which is used to invest in development in the regions.
 
Which regional assembly covers my
area?

The membership of a regional assembly consists of members of the local
authorities within the region:
The Northern and Western Regional Assembly has 21
    members and covers the county councils of Cavan, Donegal, Leitrim, Galway,
    Mayo, Monaghan, Roscommon and Sligo and the city council of Galway.
The Southern Regional Assembly has 27 members and covers
    the county councils of Carlow, Clare, Cork, Kerry, Kilkenny, Tipperary and
    Wexford, the city council of Cork, and the city and county councils of
    Limerick and Waterford.
The Eastern and Midland Regional Assembly has 35 members
    and covers the county councils of Dun Laoghaire-Rathdown, Fingal, Kildare,
    Laois, Longford, Louth, Meath, Offaly, South Dublin, Westmeath and Wicklow
    and the city council of Dublin.

Freedom of information (FOI) 


You have the right to get copies of records held by public bodies under the
Freedom of Information (FOI) Acts.This may include:
Records that relate to you personally
Any other records created since 21 April 1998
FOI only applies to FOI bodies. These are mostly bodies
that are publicly funded (for example, government departments).If you want to apply for records that are held about you by a private
organisation, you can apply
under data protection laws.FOI allows the public to have information about what the Government is doing
and it is often used by journalists, campaigners and opposition parties.You can get information that is held about you by public bodies for free in
most cases. In some situations, the information may be redacted or withheld
(see ‘your rights under FOI’ below).The laws on freedom of information are set out in the Freedom of Information
Act 2014 and its amendments and
regulations.

 
Organisations that are covered by FOI

FOI laws apply to public bodies unless they are exempt. FOI bodies
include:
Government departments
Bodies that were set up by an Act of the Oireachtas (for example, the
    Consumer and Competition Authority was set up by the Consumer and
    Competition Protection Act 2014), or established by a Minister or the
    Government
A company where the majority of the shares are held by or on behalf of a
    Minister of the Government, or any of its subsidiaries
A higher education institute that is publicly funded
Some non-public bodies that get a lot of public funding
A full list of FOI bodies
is on the website of the FOI policy unit.Some information, even if it is held by an FOI body, is exempt from FOI (see
‘Your rights under FOI’ below).If you want to request information that is held on you by a company or
organisation that is not listed, you can make
a subject access request under data protection law (the GDPR).Publication schemesFOI bodies must have a publication scheme in place. This means that the FOI
body should publish as much information as possible in a way that is open and
easy to access, without the need for an FOI request. This information should be
published under the following headings:
Information about the body
Services provided to the public
Decision making processes for major policy proposals
Financial information
Procurement
FOI disclosures log and other information to be published routinely

 
Your rights under FOI

FOI gives you the right to:
Access records held by FOI bodies
Have your personal records corrected if the information is incorrect,
    incomplete or misleading
Get a reason for decisions made by public bodies that affect you
Records that are includedYou can ask for records under FOI from the date that the Freedom of
Information Act applies to the body concerned. This is known as the
‘effective date’. For most bodies, the effective date is 21 April
1998. You can ask for records from before the effective date if either:
The record relates to personal information about you
You need a record from before the effective date to understand later
    records
A record can be a paper document or information held on computer. It
includes, for example, printouts, maps, plans, microfilm, audio-visual
material, disks and tapes.Records that are exemptSome types of records are exempt from FOI. Exemptions are either mandatory
or discretionary. For discretionary exemptions, the FOI body should try to
balance the public interest against any harm that releasing the records could
cause.The following are some examples of records that may be exempt from FOI:
National security and international relations
Meetings of the Government
Information that was given in confidence or commercially sensitive
    information
Personal information (of someone other than the requester)

 
How to make an FOI request

Before you apply, you should check if the information you want to get is
publicly available already. Many FOI bodies publish detailed information on
their websites. You may also be able to get the information you need by
speaking to their FOI officer, or another member of staff.If you decide to make making an application, you should:
Check if there is an FOI form on the FOI body’s website (you don’t
    have to use a form, but it may make the application easier). Check also the
    address to make an FOI request. Some organisations have regional FOI
    officers.
Complete the form, or (if there is no form) write a letter, or email, and
    state that you are making the request under the Freedom
    of Information Act 2014
Make your request as specific as possible and give as much information as
    you can to help the FOI body find the records you need. If you are seeking
    personal information, enclose a copy of identification.
What happens after you make a request?The FOI body must acknowledge your request within 2 weeks. In most cases,
the FOI body can respond to your request within 4 weeks. The FOI body may ask
for more time to complete your request if, for example, there are a lot of
documents to consider. They must notify you in writing if they wish to extend
the time, and they cannot extend it for more than a further 4 weeks.
 
FOI fees

You do not have to pay to access your own personal records.Non-personal recordsFor non-personal records, the following fees apply:



Type of request or
        application
Standard fee
Reduced fee(for medical card
        holders)


Initial request for a record
Free 
Free 


Internal review
€30 
€10 


Review by Information Commissioner
€50 
€15 


Application for amendment containing
        incorrect information
Free
Free


Application for reasons for a decision
        affecting individual
Free
Free


Charges for search, retrieval and copyingYou may also be charged for the time the body spends searching and
retrieving records, and for copying costs. If the cost is under €101, no
charge applies. If the cost is above this, you will be charged in full, up to a
maximum of €500.It is unlikely that you will be charged for personal records unless there is
a very large quantity.If the cost for the time and copying would be greater than €700, the FOI
body can refuse to process your request unless you revise your request to bring
the costs down below €700.



Type of charge 
Standard charge


Search and retrieval of records
€20 per hour


Photocopying 
4 cent per sheet 


CD-ROM containing copy of documents
€10 


Radiograph (X-ray) containing copy documents
      
€6


 
Refusals and appeals

The FOI body may refuse your request in whole or in part. They must tell you
in writing of their decision, and they must give you a reason why they have
refused to grant you access to a record (or part of a record).They must also give you information about how to appeal.AppealsYou can request a review of the decision to refuse your application by
writing to the FOI officer within 3 weeks of the decision (or after 4 weeks
from your FOI request if you have not received a response). The review must be
carried out by a member of staff who is more senior than the person who made
the original decision.If you are still unhappy with the outcome of your application, you can make
an appeal to the Information Commissioner.
 
Further information

Further information on FOI procedures and laws are on the Freedom of
Information website. This website is operated by the FOI policy unit of the
Department of Public Expenditure, NDP Delivery and Reform.To make an FOI request, you should contact the FOI body that holds the
records you want to get.

Office of the Ombudsman

The Office of the Ombudsman examines complaints from members of the public
who believe they have been treated unfairly by a public body.It also examines complaints about public service organisations that fail to
provide accessible buildings, services and information, as required in the Disability
Act 2005.The Office of the Ombudsman is independent and complaints must be examined
in a fair and transparent way. It is free to use its services.The current Ombudsman is Ger Deering. He was appointed by the President
in January 2022.
 
What can you complain to the Ombudsman
about?

You can make a complaint to the Ombudsman if you are unhappy with the
service provided by:
Government
    departments
Local
    authorities
The Health Service Executive (HSE)
Third-level education bodies
Private nursing homes
A  full list is available on the Ombudsman website.You cannot make a complaint to the Ombudsman about:
An Garda Síochána – see Garda
    Síochána Ombudsman Commission (GSOC)
Telecommunications or postal companies (including An Post) – see Making
    a complaint about telecommunications or postal services
Utility companies – see Commission
    for Regulation of Utilities
Insurance companies, banks or financial institutions – see Making
    a complaint about a financial service provider
You can read a full list
of exempt agencies.You must make a complaint to the relevant service provider
first. The Office of the Ombudsman has information about how to complain
to a service provider.
 
What type of complaints can the Ombudsman
investigate?

The Ombudsman can investigate a complaint if you believe that a public service
body has given you the wrong information or your complaint has not been dealt
with properly. 

They can also investigate a decision that you think is unfair, or that the
reason for the decision has not been properly explained to you. You can also
complain about delays in a public body making a decision.There are certain complaints that the Ombudsman cannot examine, including
complaints about:
Clinical judgements of doctors or other medical professionals
Job applications 
Decisions relating to immigration or naturalisation
How prisons are run 
You can  read the list in full on the Ombudsman website.The Office of the Ombudsman cannot examine a complaint if you have already
started legal proceedings against a public body for the same complaint.
 
How are complaints to the Ombudsman
investigated?

The Ombudsman first decides if they can handle your complaint. If they can,
they begin a preliminary investigation and ask the public service body to
provide relevant information. You may also be informally interviewed at this
stage.Once the information has been gathered, the Ombudsman decides whether a
formal investigation is required.In a formal investigation, the Ombudsman drafts a statement of complaint in
consultation with you. The investigation is carried out in private and usually
in writing. The Ombudsman may demand any information, files or documents to
help them carry out the investigation. At the end of the investigation process,
the Ombudsman must inform you of their decisionDepending on the outcome, they may ask the provider to change its decision
or offer an explanation, compensation or both. The Ombudsman can only make
recommendations. Their decisions are not legally binding.If you are not happy with how the Ombudsman has investigated your complaint,
you can  request a review.
 
How to make a complaint 

You must make a complaint to the relevant service provider first. The Office
of the Ombudsman has information about how
to complain to a service provider.If your complaint meets the criteria outlined above, you can start the
process by filling out an online
form. Alternatively, you can:
Fill in an application
    form and post it to the Office of the Ombudsman at the address
    below
Make a complaint in person or by attending an outreach
    clinic
Complaints must be received within 12 months of the
decision or action that you want to complain about took place. The Ombudsman
may investigate a complaint beyond this time limit, if there is a good reason
for the delay.

Comptroller and Auditor General

The Irish
Constitution states that a Comptroller and Auditor General must be
nominated by Dáil Eireann and appointed by the President. The main function of
the Comptroller and Auditor General is to carry out an audit every year of the
State's accounts. They then submit an annual report of the audit to Dáil
Eireann. The purpose of the audit is to provide independent assurance that
public funds are being well managed and used legally.The Comptroller and Auditor General is also the Supreme Audit Institution
(SAI) for Ireland. Supreme Audit Institutions in Ireland and abroad are linked
through a number of regional and international bodies:
The European
    Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions (EUROSAI)
The International Organisation of
    Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI)

 
Nomination

The Comptroller and Auditor General is nominated by Dáil
Eireann and appointed by the Irish
President. You can read further
information on the current Comptroller and Auditor General.The Comptroller and Auditor General cannot be a member of the Oireachtas
(the Irish Houses of Parliament).
 
Roles and duties

The Comptroller and Auditor General is responsible for auditing the accounts
of many state departments and organisations, including:
Central government
Funds administered by government departments
State revenue collection
Non-commercial state sponsored bodies
Universities and other third level educational institutions
Health bodies and agencies
Educational training boards
You can see an overview of government expenditure on whereyourmoneygoes.gov.ie, a
website of the Office of the Government Chief Information Officer.


Public petitions

The parliamentary public petitions system allows members of the public to
raise issues of general public interest with the Houses
of the Oireachtas (parliament).Decisions about petitions are made by the Joint Committee on
Public Petitions, which is a parliamentary committee consisting of TDs and
Senators.
 
Petition guidelines 

If you are submitting a petition it must relate to a matter on which the
Houses of the Oireachtas have the power to act and the petition must be in the
proper form. It must not:
Relate to a case where court proceedings have been initiated and the case
    will be heard before a jury
Contain any names of individuals
Contain offensive language
Be frivolous
Be the same as a petition brought by you, or on your behalf, during the
    current lifetime of the Dáil
Require the committee to consider a complaint that has already had a
    decision made about it by an Ombudsman or some redress body.
You will be asked to show that you have already tried to resolve the issue
raised in your petition, for example, by raising it with the Ombudsman, public
bodies, or directly with the relevant Government Department.Your petition should also include the name and address of anyone who has
agreed to support the petition, though only one signature is necessary to
submit a petition.You are encouraged to submit
your petition online. You can also download
the petition form and submit it:
By e-mail to submitapetition@oireachtas.ie
or
By post to the Clerk to the Joint Committee on Public Petitions at the
    address below
There is no charge for submitting a petition.
 
Decision process

You submit your petition to the Joint Committee on
Public Petitions. The Joint Committee must first decide whether your
petition is compliant with Dáil
and Seanad standing orders. If it decides that it is, it will then
consider your petition.When considering your petition the Joint Committee may invite you to appear
before it. It may also seek oral or written evidence from the relevant
government department, as well as other relevant bodies. It may also:
Refer your petition to some other parliamentary committee for further
    consideration
Refer your petition to an ombudsman or some regulatory or redress
  body
Following its considerations, the Joint Committee makes a decision on what
further action it will take. This action can include reporting to the Dáil with
recommendations, and requesting that the report be debated by the Dáil.If the Joint Committee decides that no further action is required your
petition will be closed. You will be notified of the Joint Committee’s final
decision.Further
information and advice on the petitions process can be obtained from the
Clerk to the Joint Committee on Public Petitions. A list
of petitions already submitted is available on the Houses of the Oireachtas
website.

Regulation of lobbying

Lobbying involves making views known to politicians and public servants
about laws, policies and practices as well as potentially seeking to have those
laws, policies and practices changed. Lobbying takes many different forms. You
may make your views known as a private citizen on issues that directly affect
you, or you may present views on issues that affect other groups of people. You
may lobby in person, get someone else to lobby on your behalf or lobby through
writing.The Regulation
of Lobbying Act 2015 provides that people who are lobbying must register
with the Standards in Public Office
Commission. They must also provide information about their lobbying
activities. It also provides a code of conduct for lobbying activities and
introduces a “cooling-off” period during which some former officials may
not do any lobbying.You can access the Register
of Lobbying on lobbying.ie.There is no charge to register as a lobbyist or to view the Register of
Lobbying.
 
Who needs to register to lobby

You are required to register if you are carrying on lobbying activities,
meaning:
You are communicating directly or indirectly with a designated
    public official
You are communicating about a relevant matter
The communication is not an excepted
    communication
And you are one of the following:
A professional lobbyist being paid by a client to lobby on their behalf
    (where the client is an employer of more than 10 full time employees or is
    a representative body or an advocacy body which has at least one full-time
    employee)
An employer with more than 10 employees where the communications are made
    on your behalf
A representative body with at least one employee, communicating on behalf
    of its members, where the communication is made by a paid employee or
    office holder of the body.
An advocacy body with at least one employee that exists primarily to take
    up particular issues and a paid employee or office holder of the body is
    communicating on such issues.
A person communicating about the development or zoning of land.
Designated public officialLobbying is communication with a designated public official. Designated
public officials are:
Ministers of the Government and Ministers of State
Other members of Dáil Éireann (TDs) and Seanad Éireann (Senators)
Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) for constituencies in the
  State
Members of local authorities (Councillors)
Special advisers
Prescribed
    public servants and office holders
Public bodies must publish information on their employees who are designated
public officials.Communication on a ‘relevant matter’You must be making a relevant
communication. A relevant communication means an oral or written
communication made personally (directly or indirectly) to a designated public
official in relation to a relevant matter. It does not include certain types of
communication. See ‘Excepted communications’ below.A relevant matter means any matter relating to:
The initiation, development or modification of any public policy or of
    any public programme,
The preparation or amendment of any law
The award of any grant, loan or other financial support, contract or
    other agreement, or of any licence or other authorisation involving public
    funds
It does not include any matter relating only to the implementation of any
such policy, programme, enactment or award.Excepted communicationsCertain types of communication, known as excepted
communications, are not considered to be lobbying under the legislation.
These include:
Communications by or on behalf of an individual relating to their private
    affairs about any matter other than the development or zoning of land
Communications requesting factual information or providing factual
    information in response to a request for the information
Communications requested by a public service body and published by it
Development and zoning of landYou are considered to be lobbying if you make a relevant communication about
the development or zoning of land under the Planning and Development Acts 2000
to 2014.A communication about obtaining planning permission to build or extend your
principal private residence is considered an excepted communication and
therefore not lobbying. Under the legislation, your principal private residence
is a dwelling occupied by you as your main residence. It includes up to 1 acre
of land exclusive of your dwelling that you have for your own occupation and
enjoyment.Making your views known to a local authority is not considered to be
lobbying if it is:
Part of a formal public consultation process about a development or local
    area plan
A proposal to zone or re-zone particular lands
Applications for planning permission and submissions in relation to an
    application for planning permission
However, if you communicate with a designated public official outside the
formal public consultation or application process you may have to register your
lobbying activity.You can find more information in the Commission’s Guidelines
on lobbying in relation to development and zoning of land.
 
How to register

Since 1 September 2015, if you are carrying on lobbying activities you must
register at lobbying.ie. You are not
required to register before you begin lobbying. If you start lobbying
between:
1 September and 31 December, you must register by 21 January
1 January and 30 April, you must register by 21 May
1 May and 31 August, you must register by 21 September
You must provide the following information when registering:
Your name, if you are lobbying in a personal capacity, or the name of
    your company or organisation
The address (or principal address) at which you carry on business or (if
    there is no such address) the address at which you normally live
Your business or main activities
Any e-mail address, telephone number or website address relating to your
    business or main activities
Any registration number issued to you by the Companies Registration
  Office
You must also make returns about your lobbying activities during each of the
above periods within 21 days of the end of the period. You have to provide the
following:
Where the lobbying was carried out on behalf of someone else, information
    about that person
The designated public officials who were lobbied and the public body by
    which they are employed or in which they hold any office or other
  position
The subject matter of lobbying and the result it was intended to secure.
    There must be a separate return for each subject matter. This information
    must be clear, detailed and meaningful
The type and extent of the lobbying activities carried on
The name of the individual who had primary responsibility for carrying on
    the lobbying activities
The name of each person who is or has been a designated public official
    employed by or providing services to you, and who was engaged in carrying
    on lobbying activities
Any change to your registration information
If there has been no lobbying activity during the period, your return must
state that. You do not have to make a return if your entry in the Register
indicates that you have permanently ceased to carry on lobbying activities.Viewing the RegisterThe Register
of Lobbying is available to view for free on the lobbying.ie website. It
holds information about:
Who is lobbying and on whose behalf lobbying is being carried out
Who is being lobbied
The issues involved and the intended result of the lobbying

 
Access to environmental information

You have the right to obtain certain environmental information from a public
authority.To get access to environmental information you can use Freedom
of Information (FOI) legislation or the European
Communities (Access to Information on the Environment) Regulations 2007 to 2018
(AIE Regulations). These Regulations give effect in Ireland to the AIE
Directive, which was adopted to give effect to the Access to Information
pillar of the Aarhus Convention.As well as giving you the right to access environmental information, the AIE
Regulations also oblige public authorities to be proactive in disseminating
environmental information to the public. Public authorities must inform the
public of their rights and provide information and guidance on exercising those
rights. They must also make reasonable efforts to maintain environmental
information and have it in a form that is accessible and can be reproduced.You can read the guidance
notes on the implementation of the AIE Regulations public authorities
must have regard to.
 
Rules

What is a public authority?A public authority is any body or organisation that has a role in public
administration and that possesses environmental information. The definition of
public authorities under the AIE Regulations is broader than under FOI
legislation. This means if an authority is not covered by FOI, you may still be
able to get access to environmental information using the AIE Regulations.
Public authorities, for the purposes of AIE Regulations, include government
departments, local
authorities, commercial and non-commercial State agencies and regulatory
bodies. The President and certain other offices are now excluded from the
definition of “public authority” for AIE purposes.If a body or organisation denies your request for environmental information
on the basis that it is not a public authority, you can query this decision,
following the steps outlined below - see ‘What can I do if I am refused
access to information?’. What information can I access?The AIE Regulations allow you to access a wide range of information. They
allow you to access environmental information produced by a public authority,
received by a public authority and held elsewhere on behalf of the
authority.Environmental information includes information on: 
The state of the elements of the environment, such as air and atmosphere,
    water, soil, land, landscape and natural sites including wetlands, coastal
    and marine areas, biological diversity and its components, including
    genetically modified organisms and the interaction among these elements
  
Factors, such as substances, energy, noise, radiation or waste, including
    radioactive waste, emissions, discharges and other releases into the
    environment, affecting or likely to affect the elements of the environment
  
Measures (including administrative measures), such as policies,
    legislation, plans, programmes, environmental agreements, and activities
    affecting or likely to affect the elements and factors referred to above as
    well as measures or activities designed to protect those elements 
Cost-benefit and other economic analyses and assumptions used for the
    above measures and activities 
The state of human health and safety, including the contamination of the
    food chain, where relevant, conditions of human life, cultural sites and
    built structures that may be affected by the elements of the environment
  
Reports on the implementation of environmental legislation 
How will my request be handled?The public authority must respond to your request as soon as possible and
generally within 1 month of having received it. It should offer assistance to
enable you to make a request, particularly if you have literacy difficulties or
a disability.If the request is complex or a large volume of information is required, the
authority must write to you within a month and inform you of its difficulties
processing your request. It must also give you a date by which it will respond,
which must be not more than 2 months after it got your original request.The AIE Regulations require public authorities to designate information
officers to maintain registers or lists of the environmental information held,
or else provide an information point to indicate clearly where such information
can be found. Public authorities must also register and process all requests
for the environmental information that they hold.What if the public authority doesn’t have the information but another
public authority may?If the authority to which you make your request does not have the
information, it may transfer your request to the authority that does have it,
and inform you of this. However, instead of transferring your request, it may
provide you with information about where to send your request. Can I be refused access to environmental information?You may be refused access to some types of information. For example, you may
be refused information about the location of an endangered species if
disclosure of this information could put the species at risk. You may also be
refused access to draft or incomplete documents, internal communication (such
as internal emails) or material that is commercially sensitive. Further details
on exemptions are available in the guidance
notes. In general, you cannot be refused information about emissions
into the environment. A request for information using the AIE Regulations can be refused if the
information is required to be made available under any other statutory
provision - for example, where a planning authority is required to publish the
information or make a planning file available.What can I do if I am refused access to information?The public authority must notify you of the refusal of your request
generally within 1 month. If you do not get a response within this time you can
assume that your request has been refused.There are reasons when you can be legally refused access to environmental
information. However, if a public authority refuses your request for
information or has not dealt with your request appropriately, you can seek an
internal review of the decision made by the public authority. If you require an internal review, you must request it within 1 month of
getting the decision.If you are not satisfied with the outcome of the internal review you can
appeal to the Commissioner for Environmental
Information (CEI). You must appeal within 1 month of getting the reviewed
decision from the public authority. The CEI may extend the time limit if he/she
believes it is reasonable to do so. Public authorities must comply with the CEI's decisions and if necessary the
CEI can apply to the High Court to have a decision upheld. The CEI's decisions are published on
ocei.gov.ie.You (or any other person affected by the CEI’s decision) can appeal
to the High Court on a point of law arising from that decision. The CEI
publishes further information on how to appeal.See 'How to apply' below for more details on requesting an internal review
or making an appeal. 
 
Rates

There is no charge for applying for environmental
information under the AIE Regulations. You may get the information
without charge, but there may be a fee to take account of the costs of
compiling and copying information. Public authorities must make publicly
available a list of fees, if any, charged for providing environmental
information. There is no charge for an internal review of a decision by
a public authority. However, if the review decides that you should get the
information you requested, you may be charged for photocopying etc.It costs €50 to take an appeal to the CEI, or €15 if
you have a medical card. If you were not a party to the original request and
are appealing a decision to release information that you feel will incriminate
you, the fee is €15. 
 
How to apply

You must make your request for environmental information in
writing or electronic form. Refer to the public authority’s website or
Information Unit for guidance. When sending your request, you must:
Mention the AIE Regulations 
State clearly the environmental information you want. Be as specific as
    possible - this will help your application to be processed faster and may
    reduce your costs (if any) 
Provide your contact details 
If you require the information in a specific format (such as email or
letter) you should specify which format in your request. You do not have to state your interest in making the request.
 
Right to vote

To vote in any election and referendum, you must be entitled to vote. Your entitlement is based on your nationality, and there are rules about the nationalities that are allowed to vote in elections and referendums in Ireland.You must also be:18 years or over on the day of the vote andResident in Ireland andRegistered to voteEven if you are eligible to vote because of your nationality, you cannot vote unless you are registered on the Register of Electors. You can check the register to see if you are registered. See our document ‘Registering to vote’ for more information.This page explains who is eligible to vote in:Elections to the Dáil – the Lower House of the Oireachtas, or national parliament (called general elections)Elections to the Seanad - the Upper House of the OireachtasElections to the European ParliamentLocal electionsPresidential electionsReferendumsIf your citizenship changes, you should update your details on the Register of Electors.
 
Irish citizens

Irish citizens can vote in:General electionsEuropean electionsLocal electionsPresidential electionsReferendumsYou must be aged 18 years or over, and registered to vote. You cannot register to vote if you live outside Ireland, although there are some exceptions.Seanad electionsTo vote in Seanad elections, you must be an Irish citizen who is:A graduate of the National University of Ireland (or an NUI recognised college) orA graduate of Trinity CollegeA member of Dáil Eireann (a Teachta Dála, or TD)An outgoing member of the SeanadA member of a county or city council (a councillor)If you are eligible, you can vote in the NUI and Trinity College constituencies, even if you are resident outside Ireland.
 
British citizens

British citizens who live in Ireland can vote in:General electionsLocal electionsBritish citizens are identified by the letter 'D' on the Register of Electors.
 
European Union citizens

Citizens of the EU who live in Ireland can vote in:European electionsLocal electionsIf you are an EU citizen, other than an Irish citizen, and you were not registered to vote in previous European elections in Ireland, you must also complete a declaration on form EP1 (available from your local authority). This is to guard against double voting in European elections. The local authority will send the information in your declaration to your country of nationality.You must be registered at one address only. If you move away from the address at which you are registered, you will need to contact the local authority and give them your new address.If you leave your address but you plan to return there within 18 months, you can continue to be registered there, as long you do not register at any other address.EU citizens are identified by the letter ‘E’ on the Register of Electors.
 
Non-EU citizens

Citizens from outside the European Union can vote in:Local electionsYou can vote in a local election if you are a non-EU citizen, regardless of the type of residence you hold, or if you are seeking asylum and have not had a decision on your application.Non-EU citizens are identified by the letter 'L' on the Register of Electors.
 
What happens if my citizenship changes?

If your citizenship changes, you should update your details on the Register of Electors.If you become an Irish citizen, and you are already registered to vote, you should complete form ERF1 to add your new citizenship details to the Register of Electors. You will need to supply proof that you are now an Irish citizen (either a copy of your naturalisation certificate, or a copy of the photo page of your Irish passport).
 
Registering to vote

If you want to vote in an election or referendum in Ireland, you must be:Eligible to vote andRegistered to voteThis page explains how to register to vote, and what to do if your situation has changed since the last election or referendum took place.Changes to the registration systemYou can now register to vote for the first time and update the register throughout the year. If you provide your PPS number, you do not need to have your identification and forms witnessed at a Garda station. Applications to register and to change the register can be made online at checktheregister.ie.If you are already registered, you should check your details and add your PPS number, date of birth and your Eircode on checktheregister.ie. Everyone is being asked to do this to keep the register up to date.
 
Registration dates to vote in March 2024 referendums

Two constitutional referendums on family and care will be held on 8 March 2024.If you are not registered to vote and you want to vote in these referendums, you must apply to your local authority by:12 February 2024 for Postal or Special Voting arrangements (see ‘Postal Voters and Special Voters lists’ below)20 February 2024 to register to vote or to change your details on the register
 
How to register to vote

Each local authority is legally obliged to maintain, update and publish its Register of Electors. The Register must be maintained and updated on an ongoing basis.To be eligible for inclusion in the Register of Electors, you must:Be at least 18 years oldBe ordinarily resident at an address in IrelandIf you have no address, you can register with ‘no fixed address.’ You can give an address where you can get correspondence.If you have more than one address, you should give the address where you want to be registered. You can only be registered at one address.You can register to vote:Online at checktheregister.ieBy filling in an application formIf you do not give a PPS number, you must get your form and ID witnessed at a local Garda station.Deadline for registering to voteYour application must be received by the local authority at least 15 days before an election or referendum (excluding Sundays, Good Friday and public holidays). If it is received on or after 14 days before an election or referendum is taking place, you will not be registered to vote in that election or referendum.Pending elector listYou can add your details to the ‘pending elector list’ if you are 16 or 17 and you are ordinarily resident in Ireland.Anonymous electorsThe Register of Electors can be inspected at local authority offices. If you are concerned that having your details available for inspection would put you in danger, you can apply to be an anonymous elector. You can get the form to make this request at checktheregister.ie.The Register of Electors is a public document. Your PPS number and your date of birth will not be published.
 
Updating your details

You can now update your details at any time during the year. The easiest way to do this is on checktheregister.ie.You must change your details at least 15 days before polling day. Sundays, public holidays and Good Friday are not counted as days for this purpose.If you are already registered, you should check your details and add your PPS number, date of birth and your Eircode on checktheregister.ie. This will allow the local authority to check your details are correct. Your PPS number and date of birth will not be published on the electoral register.Third party requestsYou can apply to update the register if you have reasonable grounds to believe an entry about another person is inaccurate. For example, you can apply to update the register if someone has died.Local authority’s duty to maintain the registerThe local authority can ask for documents to prove that you are eligible to vote as part of its duty to make sure that the register is up to date.
 
Postal Voters and Special Voters lists

Voting by post Most voters have to vote in person at an official voting centre. However, you may be eligible for a postal vote if you are:An Irish diplomat posted abroad, or their spouse or civil partner who is living abroad with themA whole-time member of the Defence ForcesYou may also be eligible for a postal vote if you cannot go to a polling station because:You have an illness or disabilityYou are studying full time at an educational institution in Ireland, which is away from the home address where you are registeredYou cannot vote at your local polling station because of your occupation, service or employmentYou are unable to vote at your polling station because you are in prison as a result of an order of a courtYou are a member of the Garda SíochánaYou are registered as an anonymous elector, or you are part of the household of an anonymous electorPeople who are eligible to vote by post are registered on the Postal Voters list. The latest date for receipt of applications is:2 days after the date of dissolution of the Dáil in the case of a general election2 days after the date of the order appointing polling day in the case of a Dáil bye-election22 days (excluding Sundays and public holidays) before polling day for other elections or referendumsApplication forms are available on checktheregister.ie and from your local authority.If you are registered as a postal voter, you can only vote by post. You cannot vote at a polling station.Special Voters ListYou may qualify to be on a Special Voters List if you live in a hospital, nursing home or similar institution and wish to vote at these locations. If you are applying for the first time you must send a medical certificate with your application.The latest date for receipt of applications is:2 days after the date of dissolution of the Dáil in the case of a general election2 days after the date polling day order is made in the case of a Dáil bye-election22 days (excluding Sundays, Good Friday and public holidays) before polling day for other elections or referendumsApplication forms are available on checktheregister.ie and from your local authority, Garda station or post office.You can read more about voting facilities for people with disabilities.
 
Register of Electors and direct marketing

Until recently, an edited version of the Register of Electors was available. This edited version could be used for direct marketing purposes.Since October 2022, there is no longer an edited version of the Register of Electors.It is an offence for an organisation to use the full electoral register for direct marketing purposes. Find out more about how to deal with unsolicited direct marketing material.
 
Student voters

If you are studying away from home while attending college, you can register at either your home address or your student residential address.You must be registered at one address only.If you live away from the address at which you are registered, you will need to update the register.If you leave your address but you plan to return there within 18 months, you can continue to be registered there, as long you do not register at any other address.Students can register to vote by post if they are currently registered, but unable to go to their polling station because they are studying away from home. To register to vote by post, complete form PV4 and send it to the local authority in the area where you want to vote. See 'Postal Voters and Special Voters lists' above for more information.
 
Overseas voters

If you are an Irish citizen living abroad, you cannot be added to the Register of Electors unless you are an Irish official on duty abroad (or their spouse or civil partner).In its fifth report in 2013, the Convention on the Constitution recommended that Irish citizens resident outside the State should have the right to vote in presidential elections. This would require a referendum.
 
Facilities for voters with disabilities


There are arrangements in place for people with disabilities, illnesses, visual impairments, or reading and writing disabilities, to allow you to exercise your right to vote. You can:Change the polling station where you voteHave a companion or the presiding officer help you voteVote using a ballot paper template if you have a visual impairmentVote by postVote at a hospital, nursing home or similar institution if you live there
 
Polling station accessibility

Whenever possible, polling stations are located in buildings that are accessible to people with disabilities. Polling stations must always be at the ground floor level. Temporary ramps can be installed to facilitate access.Voting compartments in polling stations are usually designed for people who are standing up. The returning officer (the person responsible for organising the election or referendum in your constituency) must make a table and chair available for voters who need to sit down.Voting at an alternative polling stationThe returning officer will give public notice of all the polling stations in the constituency that are not accessible to wheelchair users. If you have difficulty gaining access to your local polling station, you can apply in writing to the returning officer at least a week before polling day for permission to vote at another polling station in the same constituency. In Dublin and Cork, the returning officer is the city or county sheriff. In other counties, it is the county registrar.To help the returning officer pick a suitable alternative station you should explain in your application why you cannot access your local station. If possible, you should suggest another polling station that is both accessible and convenient for you. The returning officer will send you written authorisation to vote at another polling station, usually the one that you have suggested. You should present this authorisation (along with the usual evidence of identity) when you go to vote. Once you have been assigned another polling station, you cannot vote at your local station.
 
Casting your vote

Assistance with voting at a polling stationThe presiding officer is the person who is responsible for taking the poll at a polling station. A supervising presiding officer may also be on duty – their responsibilities include supervising the arrangements for voters with disabilities. You can ask to see the supervising presiding officer if you need assistance.There are strict rules to ensure that the secrecy and security of the ballot are maintained. The law is specific about the types of voters who can be helped to vote, how they may be helped, and who may help them. The presiding officer has to apply the law, which is intended to make sure that you can vote the way you want to and that your vote is kept secret.Depending on the nature of your disability, you may be helped to vote in 3 ways:Companion votingAssistance from the presiding officerUsing a ballot paper templateCompanion votingIf you have a visual impairment, a disability or a literacy difficulty that prevents you from voting without assistance, you can bring a companion with you to mark the ballot paper for you. This person must be at least 16 years old and cannot:Be an election candidate or a candidate’s agentHelp more than 2 people vote per electionIf the presiding officer does not believe that the person you choose is eligible to act as a companion, another person can act as your companion or you can ask the presiding officer to assist you.When a companion is assisting you, they go into a voting compartment with you and you tell them how to mark the ballot. The companion then places the marked ballot paper in the ballot box.Assistance from the presiding officerIf you have a visual impairment, a disability or a literacy difficulty that prevents you from voting without assistance, the presiding officer can help you mark the ballot paper.The presiding officer and the personation agents go with you to a part of the polling station where a conversation at a normal volume cannot be overheard. A personation agent is a representative of a candidate who supervises the polling and helps prevent electoral offences.If necessary, the presiding officer will suspend entry to the polling station and have it cleared, to ensure that nobody can hear how you vote. The personation agents are there as witnesses to make sure that the presiding officer follows your instructions. As with everyone involved in a poll, there is a statutory obligation on personation agents to keep your vote secret.The presiding officer asks how you want to vote and marks the ballot paper according to your preferences. They will read out any information from the ballot paper you may need to hear to make your decision. They then put the ballot paper in the ballot box.The law forbids a presiding officer from acting on any written instructions received from a voter. This is because someone else may have written or changed the instructions and it would make it harder to be sure that your vote was being cast the way you want.If you want the presiding officer to help you vote, you should go to the polling station well before it closes at night. The law allows a presiding officer to refuse a request for assistance during the last two hours of voting if helping one elector would prevent others from voting. This restriction does not apply to companion voting - you can be helped to vote by a companion at any time during polling hours.Using a ballot paper templateA ballot paper template is a transparent plastic device that is placed on top of a ballot paper. The template has raised print and braille on it, so that visually impaired people can vote without assistance. You can use this option if you have a visual impairment and don't want to be helped by a companion or presiding officer to mark your ballot paper.The template is used with a Freephone number that identifies the candidates in your area. If you want to listen to this information before polling day, you can get the number from your local authority or returning officer. You can listen to the information before polling day to familiarise yourself with it and/or you can use your mobile phone to call the number while you are in the polling compartment.Ballot paper templates are available at each polling station. If you tell the presiding officer that you want to use a template, you will be handed a ballot paper with the template attached to it.Raised print and Braille are used to identify the openings in the template that match the squares on the ballot paper. You mark your choices on the ballot paper beneath the template. There is a flap over each opening, so that you can close the flap when you have marked a square. When you have finished marking the ballot paper, you can detach it from the template, fold it and place it in the ballot box in the usual way.The Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage has information about using the template. There is more detail about the templates on ncbi.ie.
 
Applying to vote from home

If you live at home and you have a disability or illness that prevents you from going to a polling station, you may qualify to vote by post. You must apply to your local authority to be included in the Postal Voters List.If you are living in a hospital, nursing home or similar institution and you have a disability or illness that prevents you from going to the polling station, you can vote at the hospital or nursing home. You must apply to your local authority to be included in the Special Voters List.If you are on the current year's Postal or Special Voters List, you will generally get an application form in the post. If not, you can download one from checktheregister.ie. Forms are also available from all local authorities, post offices, Garda stations and public libraries. The application form includes provision for a medical certificate, which is usually only needed for your first application.Applications to be included in the register must be sent to your local authority. The local authority must receive your application by the following dates, at the latest:For a general election, 2 days after the date of dissolution of the DáilFor a Dáil by-election, 2 days after the date of the order appointing polling dayFor other elections or for referendums, 22 days (excluding Sundays and public holidays) before polling dayYou can read more about this in our page on registering to vote.
 
How to vote by post

Shortly before polling day, you will be sent the following documents:A ballot paperA receipt for the ballot paperAn envelope for the marked ballot paperA larger envelope addressed to the returning officerWhen you have marked the ballot paper, put it into the envelope marked "Ballot Paper Envelope" and seal it. You then put this envelope and the completed receipt for the ballot paper into the large envelope addressed to the returning officer, seal it and post it. The ballot paper must be posted - it cannot be given directly to the returning officer.
 
How to vote from a hospital or nursing home

Shortly before polling day, you will be notified of the day and approximate time when a special presiding officer will call to you at the hospital or nursing home to allow you to vote. This official will show you evidence of their identity and an appointment warrant when they arrive. They will be accompanied by a Garda, whose role is to guard the ballot papers (in the same way as in a polling station) and to act as an independent witness to guarantee that the voting procedure is carried out properly.Only the presiding officer and the Garda can be present when you cast your vote. The presiding officer will give you a declaration of identity, which they will witness for you. You then mark the ballot paper in secret, place it in the special envelope provided, close the envelope and present it to the presiding officer.If you need help with voting, the special presiding officer will provide it in the same way as at a polling station.
 
Proportional representation

When you vote in an election in Ireland, you are asked to give your vote in order of preference. This is because Ireland uses an electoral system called proportional representation with a single transferrable vote (PR–STV, or PR for short).The names of candidates appear in alphabetical order on the ballot paper, along with their photographs and their party emblem (if they wish).You vote by writing “1” or “one” opposite your first choice candidate, “2” or “two” opposite your second choice, “3” or “three” opposite your third choice, and so on. You can stop after indicating your first choice candidate or you can continue to give a preferential vote to as many candidates on the ballot paper as you wish.When you vote with more than one preference, you are instructing the returning officer (the person responsible for the counting of votes) that if your preferred candidate is eliminated, or elected with a surplus of votes, you want your vote to be transferred to your second choice candidate.PR is used in all elections in Ireland, including:General electionsLocal electionsEuropean electionsPresidential elections
 
Voting in a PR election

At the polling station on election day, you will be given a stamped ballot paper. The returning officer may ask to see some identification or a polling card. You cast your vote in a private space. The election candidates will be listed alphabetically alongside their picture, the name of their party (if they belong to a political party) and their party emblem (in some cases). You vote by placing the number of your choice next to the candidate or candidates that you have chosen.You can vote for as many or as few of the candidates as you wish.If you want to vote for one candidate only, you should mark the number “1” or the word “one” in the box next to the candidate’s name. You should not tick or mark the box with an X.Pencils will be provided, but you can bring your own pen or pencil if you wish.When you have voted you should fold your ballot paper so your vote is not visible and put the folded ballot paper into the ballot box.If you make a mistake on your ballot paper, the returning officer may give you another ballot paper. This is at the discretion of the returning officer. If you have already posted your ballot in the ballot box, the returning officer cannot give you another ballot paper.Spoiled votesBallot papers that cannot be counted are called spoiled votes. A ballot papers may be spoiled if:The ballot paper was left blankThe voter ticked or otherwise marked their preferred candidate or candidates, rather than numbering themThe writing on the ballot paper could not be understoodThe ballot paper did not have the number “1” or the word “one” next to any candidateThe ballot paper was not stamped by the returning officerThe voter wrote their name or identified themselves in some wayThe order of preference was not clear (for example, the voter wrote “3” next to 2 different candidates)The voter deliberately spoiled their paper as a protest
 
How are votes counted in a PR election?

When polling is over, all the ballot boxes are taken to a central counting place for each constituency. The count starts at 9am on the day after polling day. Each ballot box is opened separately and the ballot papers in each box are counted. The total number is compared with the total number of ballot papers issued for that box - this is done to check that ballot papers have not been put into or taken out of the box since the poll closed.The ballot papers are then sorted into piles of ballot papers for each candidate.The ballot papers are counted and sorted, and spoiled papers are rejected.The total valid poll is the total number of votes minus the number of spoiled papers.The count then takes place over a number of rounds. As candidates are elected or eliminated, the second, third (or lower) preference votes on that candidate’s ballot paper are counted.Counting continues until all the seats have been filled.
 
How is the quota calculated?

To be elected, a candidate must generally reach the quota for the constituency. The last seat can be filled by a candidate who did not reach the quota if all the other candidates have been elected or eliminated.The quota is calculated by dividing the total valid poll by 1 more than the number of available seats (if there is a number to carry over, it is ignored), and then adding 1.For example, in a 4-seat constituency with a total valid poll of 25,000, the quota is:25,000 (the total valid poll) divided by 5 (1 more than the number of seats), which is 5,000. Then add 1. The quota is 5,001.
 
What happens to surplus votes?

If a candidate receives more than the quota, their surplus ballot papers are transferred to the remaining candidates.The surplus is transferred in proportion to how many second (or lower) preferences the other candidates received in the elected candidate’s vote. If the second preference candidate on any ballot is either already elected or has been eliminated, then the third preference is used, and so on.If a candidate is elected at the first count, then all their votes are used to calculate the proportion of surplus that will be given to each candidate.For example:Candidate A receives 6,000 first preference votes at the first count. The quota is 5,000. A is elected with a surplus of 1,000 votes.Out of A’s 6,000 total votes, 30% gave their second preference to B, and 20% gave their second preference to C.B receives 300 votes (30% of 1,000) and C receives 200 votes (20% of 1,000)Where a candidate reaches the quota after the first count, only the ballot papers that brought them over the quota are examined (the votes that were transferred from the previous count).If 2 or more candidates are elected at the same time, then the surplus of the candidate with the largest vote is distributed first.
 
How are candidates eliminated?

If nobody reaches the quota after a round of counting, then the candidate with the fewest number of votes is eliminated, and all their votes are distributed. More than one candidate can be eliminated after a round of voting if it is clear that they cannot be elected, and they cannot qualify to have their election expenses repaid.
 
Recouping election costs

Candidates can qualify for recoupment (repayment) of their election expenses (up to a maximum of €8,700 at a Dáil election), if they:Are electedAre not elected, but their total number of votes exceeds one quarter of the quotaThere are extra count rules to give candidates every chance of reaching this vote threshold. At a bye-election, the threshold is calculated differently to ensure that the minimum number of votes needed to qualify for recoupment of election expenses at a general election and at a bye-election in the same constituency is broadly comparable.
 
Recounts

A recount can be ordered if a candidate asks for one, or if the returning officer decides that a recount is needed.A candidate might ask for a recount of a particular count, or round of voting. This means that the votes that were counted in the last round only are counted again and corrected if necessary.A candidate might ask for a total recount, which means that all the votes are counted as they are at the time of the request. If an error is found, then all the votes are recounted from the time the mistake happened.It is possible that candidates that have already been deemed to be elected, could have their election overturned because of a recount. A candidate is deemed to be elected once they reach the quota of votes.However, once the result is declared, a recount can only happen if it is ordered by the High Court. A candidate is declared elected when the total count is complete and the returning officer has declared the results.

Voting in a general election

This page explains what you need to do to make sure your vote counts on the day of a general election.Your polling station (where you go to cast your vote) is on your polling card, which you should have received by post. If you did not get a polling card, you can find your polling station on your local authority’s website.You do not need your polling card to vote.However, you do need to bring identification.Remember only Irish and British citizens who are resident in the State can vote in an Irish general election. You also need to be over 18 and registered to vote.
 
Identification when voting

You should bring identification with you even if you have a polling card. You can use the following documents to prove your identity:A passport (either a passport card or passport book)A driving licenceA workplace identity card (it must have a photograph)A student identity card (it must have a photograph)A travel document (it must have a photograph)A Public Services CardA bank or credit union account book with your name and address in the constituencyIf you do not have any of the documents listed above, you can use one of the following, along with evidence of your address in the constituency:A cheque book or cardA credit cardA birth or marriage certificateIf you are asked to prove your identity and you cannot do so, you may not be allowed to vote.
 
At the polling station

When you arrive at the polling station, you will be asked to state your name and address and should have your identification ready for inspection.If the presiding officer is satisfied with your identity, and your name is on the Register of Electors, the presiding officer will stamp a ballot paper and give it to you.You will then go into a voting compartment. The names of the candidates in the election appear in alphabetical order on the ballot paper along with an indication of their political party, if any.A photograph of the candidate and/or a party emblem may also appear on the ballot paper.It is a secret ballot, which means that if you take selfies or post pictures online that reveal who you, or someone else, voted for, you could be prosecuted.Each candidate at a general election may be represented by a personation agent at the polling station. This person supervises the polling and helps prevent electoral offences.However, on polling day, campaigning is forbidden, and posters must not be displayed within 50 metres of a polling station.
 
Casting your vote

You must indicate the order of your choice of candidates by writing “1” or “one” in the box beside the photograph of your first choice of candidate and, if you wish, “2” or “two” beside the photograph of your second choice of candidate, “3” or “three” beside the photograph of your third choice and so on.This allows for your vote to be transferred from your first choice to your second choice if your number one candidate has been eliminated or already elected. You can read more about how proportional representation works.If you want to vote for one candidate only, you should mark the number “1” or the word “one” in the box next to the candidate’s name. You should not tick or mark the box with an X.Pencils will be provided at polling stations, but you can bring your own pen or pencil if you wish.Once you have made your choice or choices, simply fold up the ballot paper and post it into the ballot box.If you make a mistake on your ballot paper, the returning officer may give you another ballot paper. This is at the discretion of the returning officer.If you have already posted your ballot in the ballot box, the returning officer cannot give you another ballot paper.
 
Spoiled votes

Ballot papers that cannot be counted are called spoiled votes. A ballot paper may be spoiled if:The ballot paper was left blankThe voter ticked or otherwise marked their preferred candidate or candidates, rather than numbering themThe writing on the ballot paper could not be understoodThe ballot paper did not have the number “1” or the word “one” next to any candidateThe ballot paper was not stamped by the returning officerThe voter wrote their name or identified themselves in some wayThe order of preference was not clear (for example, the voter wrote “3” next to 2 different candidates)The voter deliberately spoiled their paper as a protest
 
Voters with disabilities

There are several arrangements in place to enable people with disabilities to exercise their voting rights. You can:Vote at an alternative polling station if the local station is inaccessibleBe helped to vote at the polling station by a companion or the presiding officerVote using a ballot paper template if you have a visual impairmentVote by postVote at a hospital, nursing home or similar institution if you live thereAt least one of these facilities is available to you if you have a physical illness or disability, a visual impairment, or a reading or writing disability.You can read more about facilities for voters with disabilities.

The Electoral Commission

The Electoral Commission (An Coimisiún Toghcháin) is the new independent statutory body that oversees elections in Ireland.It has replaced the Referendum Commission and manages the Register of Political Parties. It will also have important functions regarding political advertising.The Electoral Commission was established on 9 February 2023. The Electoral Reform Act 2022 has been signed into law, and this Act governs the make-up and functions of the Commission.
 
Functions of the Electoral Commission

The functions of the Electoral Commission are set out in the Electoral Reform Act 2022, and include:Informing the public about referendumsReviewing constituencies and constituency boundaries for general, European and local electionsTelling the public about how to vote and encouraging people to vote in referendums and electionsMaintaining the Register of Political PartiesOverseeing the management of Registers of Electors by local authoritiesRegulating online political advertisingElectoral Commission constituency review 2023On 30 August 2023, the Electoral Commission published its review of Ireland's electoral constituencies.The report recommends that:The number of TDs in Dáil Eireann is increased to 174 (from 160)The number of Dáil constituencies is increased to 43 (from 39)The Oireachtas will consider the full report and its recommendations. If the Oireachtas accepts the changes, they will be passed into law and come into effect before the next general election.
 
Local elections in Ireland

Local elections are held in Ireland every 5 years, in the month of May or June. The elections allow people to elect councillors to represent them in their local authorities.There are 31 local authorities in Ireland, including County Councils, City Councils, and City and County Councils. Each county, city, and city and county council is divided into local electoral areas. Each local electoral area has a certain number of members of the local authority to elect.The polling date is set by the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage. The polling period must last at least 12 hours between 7am and 10.30pm and be same day in all of the local authority areas. The next local elections are due to be held in May or June 2024.The returning officer in each local authority is responsible for managing their local election. Each local authority pays the cost of running their own election.If a candidate is elected to more than one local authority area, they must declare in writing which area they want to represent within 3 days of the public notice of the results of the election.
 
Nomination process

If you wish to stand for election to a local authority in Ireland, you must be nominated during the week that takes place 4 weeks before the polling day.You may nominate yourself or be nominated by a person who is registered to vote in the local authority area. You may be nominated to stand in more than one area.Nomination forms  (LE1) are available from the local authority returning officer. After you have completed your nomination form, return the form to the returning officer.If you are affiliated with a political party, you must submit a Certificate of Party Affiliation with your nomination form.Both independent and party affiliated candidates can include a photograph to be included on the ballot paper. You can find the photo size and other requirements detailed in the nomination form .The returning officer must rule on whether your nomination paper is valid within one hour of when you submit it.Non-party or independent candidatesIf you have no party affiliation, you may describe your nomination as 'Non-Party' or leave the question blank on the nomination form.If you are an independent candidate, you must submit your nomination form, along with one of the following, to the returning officer:The completion of statutory declarations by 15 assenters, orLodge a deposit of €100 with the returning officerAssenters must be people who are registered to vote in the local electoral area. The statutory declaration must be witnessed by one of the following:Commissioner for oathsA peace commissionerA notary publicA member of the Garda SíochánaAn official of the registration authority
 
Rules for candidates

You are eligible to be elected to a local authority if you are ordinarily resident in Ireland and you are at least 18 years old. You do not have to be an Irish citizen.You are disqualified from becoming a member of a local authority if you are:A member of the European Commission, Parliament or CourtsA member of Dáil Éireann or Seanad ÉireannAn Ceann Comhairle (the Chairman of the Dáil) or an Cathaoirleach (the Chairman of the Seanad)A member of an Garda Síochána or a full-time member of the Irish defence forcesA judgeA member of the Court of Auditors of the European CommunitiesThe Comptroller and Auditor GeneralA civil servant - where it does not specifically state in your contract of employment that you may be a member of a local authorityA person employed by a local authority and is not the holder of a class, description or grade of employment designated by order under section 161(1)(b) of the Local Government Act 2001Employed by the Health Service Executive and at a grade or of a description of employment designated by order of the Minister for Health and ChildrenCurrently imprisoned for a term longer than 6 monthsA person who has failed pay local authority chargesA person who has failed to comply with an order of a court to pay money due to a local authorityA person who has been convicted of fraud or dishonest dealings affecting a local authority, corrupt practice or acting while disqualifiedCandidate spending limitCandidates are allowed to spend a limited amount of money on the local election campaign. This amount varies depending on the population size of the local electorate area.
 


Local electoral area
Candidate spending limit


Population over 35,000
€13,000


Population between 18,001 and 35,000
€11,500


Population of 18,000 or less
€9,750



Candidates must disclose how much they spent to the local authority within 90 days after polling day. The Minister sets the start date of the campaign spending period, which must be between 50 and 60 days before polling day.DonationsThe following rules apply to candidates:A candidate may accept no more than €1,000 from a specific donor in a calendar yearDetails of donations over €600 must be given to the local authorityA candidate who receives a donation over €100 must open and maintain a bank account specifically for their political donationsThe following restrictions apply to donations:No anonymous donations over €100No cash donations over €200For corporate donations over €200 the donor must be registered with the Standards in Public Office Commission and evidence that the donation was approved by the corporate body must be providedLocal election posters and signsThe Litter Pollution Act 1997, as amended by the Electoral (Amendment) (No. 2) Act 2009 allows people to display election posters for a certain period. They can be displayed from the date the Minister appoints the polling day by order, or 30 days before polling day, whichever is shorter. They must be taken down within 7 days after the polling day.If an election poster is causing a hazard to motorists or pedestrians, you can inform your local authority about these safety concerns.
 
How to vote in a local election

You do not have to be an Irish citizen to vote in a local election. However, you must be ordinarily resident in the State to register on the Register of Electors. You may not vote in both a county council and a city council election.To vote in a local election, you must:Be over 18 years of ageLive in the local electoral areaBe listed on the Register of ElectorsTo find out if your name is on the Electoral Register you can:Check online at checktheregister.ie, orEnquire at your local Garda station, post office, public library or local authority officeIf you want to be added to the Electoral Register, you can complete an application form and return it to your local authority. Application forms are available online at checktheregister.ie or at your local authority office. Send your completed application form by free-post to your local authority. There is no need to put a stamp on the envelope. You can also register to vote online at checktheregister.ie. If you are registering for Dublin, you can register at voter.ie.You can read more about registering to vote.Casting your voteOn polling day, you can vote by secret ballot at your local polling station. Pencils will be provided, but you can bring your own pen or pencil if you wish.The Irish electoral system is based on proportional representation by single transferable vote (PR-STV). The names of the candidates in the election appear in alphabetical order on the ballot paper along with an indication of their political party, if any. A photograph of the candidate or a party emblem may also appear on the ballot paper.You must indicate the order of your choice of candidates by writing “1” or “one” beside your first choice, and, if you wish, “2” or “two” beside your second choice, “3” or “three” beside your third choice, and so on.If you have a visual impairment, a Ballot Paper Template will be available at every polling station and you can use it to cast your vote.

Election expenses

A person who runs for election in a Dáil, presidential or European election
in Ireland must declare how much money they have spent on their campaign to the
Standards in Public Office Commission (SIPO).The spending limits in national or European elections are set out in the Electoral
Act 1997, as amended.The rules on spending during local elections are set out in the Local
Elections (Disclosures of Donations and Expenditure) Act 1999.

 
Spending rules for national and European
elections

National elections include:
General
    elections for Dáil Eireann
Presidential
    elections
It also includes bye-elections,
which are elections to fill seats in constituencies vacated between national
elections. For example, a bye-election may be triggered when a TD resigns or
dies.Candidates in Seanad
elections must declare donations, but do not need a national or election
agent.Appointment of a national agent and an election agentEach political party must appoint a national agent who must account for and
control all of the party's election expenses. As well as a national agent for
each party, each candidate must appoint an election agent to control the
candidate's spending on elections (the candidate can appoint himself or
herself).The national agent or election agent must enter into all contracts that
involve spending money on the election, for example booking advertisements with
newspapers.Similarly, each presidential candidate must appoint an election agent to
control the candidate's spending on elections (the candidate can appoint
himself or herself).Statements to SIPOEach political party's national agent must deliver a detailed statement to
the Standards in Public Office Commission
(SIPO) within 56 days after the polling day. The statement must describe
all of the expenses incurred by the party.Each candidate's election agent must deliver a similar statement setting out
the candidate's spending. A candidate may allot some of his or her spending
limit to his or her party. This must be set out in the statement.Invoices or claims relating to expenditure on the election must be sent to
the national or election agents within 45 days after the polling day. If they
are claimed after 45 days, the agent cannot pay them.It is an offence for a national or an election agent to spend over the limit
or to fail to submit the statement of expenses. It is also an offence to pay an
election expense that was claimed more than 45 days after the polling day.Similar rules apply to presidential election expenses.
 
Spending rules for local elections

In a local election, the candidate must report campaign spending to the
local authority within 90 days, following polling day.The Minister for Local Government sets a period for reckoning election
expenses by way of ministerial order.
 
Spending limits

General electionsThe limit on how much a candidate can spend depends on the number of seats
in a constituency.



Number of seats
Spending limit per candidate


5
€45,200


4
€37,650


3
€30,150


Local electionsThe limit on how much a candidate can spend in local elections depends on
the population of the local electoral area (sometimes called a ‘ward’).



Local electoral area population
Spending limit per candidate


Over 35,000
€13,000


Between 18,001 and 35,000
€11,500


€18,000 or less
€9.750


European electionsThe spending limit for a candidate in a European election is €230,000.Presidential electionsThe spending limit for a candidate in a presidential election is
€750,000.
 
Reimbursements of election
expenses

Candidates can apply to have a portion of their allowable election expenses
reimbursed under certain conditions.General electionsA candidate can have up to €8,700 reimbursed to them if their vote tally
is at least 25% of the quota for the constituency. The quota is the number of
votes a candidate must get to be elected.European electionsA candidate can have up to €38,092.14 reimbursed to them if their vote
tally is at least 25% of the quota for the constituency.Presidential electionsA candidate can have up to €200,000 reimbursed to them if their vote tally
is at least 25% of the quota for the constituency.Local and Seanad electionsCandidates cannot claim back their election expenses

SIPO publishes guidance on spending and declaring donations.

Registering a political party in Ireland
    
Introduction

Candidates at elections who are members of a registered party can add their
party’s name to their own name on the ballot paper. If the party that you
belong to is not on the Register, you are described as a non-party
candidate on the ballot paper.The Electoral
Commission is responsible for the Register of Political Parties. The
Registrar is the Chief Executive of the Electoral Commission.Under Section
43 of the Electoral Reform Act 2022, you can apply to the Registrar of
Political Parties in order to register your own political party in any of the
following elections in Ireland: 
Dáil elections 
European elections 
Local elections

 
Criteria for registration 

To be registered, your party must satisfy the Registrar that it is organised
to contest elections. You can register a party’s name and an emblem.
Unregistered parties are entitled to fight elections but the party's name will
not appear on the ballot paper.Anyone can inspect the register of political parties in Ireland by
contacting the office of the Registrar and making an appointment.You can register the party to contest all elections or to contest only local
elections. Different rules apply if you want to register to contest local
elections only.




Either 
Or


All elections
At least 300 recorded members
One TD or MEP at the time of registration


Local elections only
At least 100 recorded members
3 councillors at the time of registration


Members must be 18 or over and at least half of them must be registered to vote.You can register a party to contest an election in a particular region of
Ireland only (for example, a party campaigning for extra local services). In
this case, you need to have at least 100 members.Constitution and administrationIn addition, the party must have a constitution, a memorandum or another
document or set of rules that have been adopted by the party and that provide
for:
An annual or other periodic meeting or conference of the party
An executive committee or similar body elected by the party, which
    administers the business of the party.
Other rules for registrationA party will not be registered if its name:
Is identical to the name, abbreviation or acronym of the name of any
    registered party or so closely resembles the name, abbreviation or acronym
    of the name of a party as to be likely to confuse the public
Consists of more than 6 words
In the case of a party operating in a particular part of the country, the
name must make it clear that it only operates in that area.Party emblemsAn application to register a political party emblem will not be granted if
the emblem:
Is likely to be confused by voters with a registered emblem used by
    another party
Is obscene or offensive
Is of such a character that its publication would be likely to amount to
    the commission of an offence
Includes a word or expression, which if it was or was part of the party's
    name, would prevent the party from being registered.

 
Registered details

The following details are entered in the Register of Political Parties:
The name of the party, including any abbreviation or acronym
The emblem, if an application for its registration has been granted
The address of the party's headquarters
The name or names of the officer or officers of the party who are
    authorised to sign certificates authenticating the party's candidates at
    elections
The type or types of election that the party is registered as being
    organised to contest
Where the party is registered as organised to contest elections in a
    specified part of Ireland, a reference to that fact and to the part of the
    country concerned
The name of any political group with which the party is affiliated
The name and address of each accounting unit (for example, branch) of the
    political party and the name and address of the person (for example,
    treasurer) who is responsible for dealing with donations


 
Registration refusals and appeals

When the Registrar has considered your application for registration, you
will be notified of the decision. If the application is refused, the Registrar
will inform you of the reasons for refusal and details of how to appeal the
decision.Notices of decisions are published in Iris Oifigiúil (the Irish Government
official gazette).Appeals must be lodged within 21 days of the publication of the decision in
Iris Oifigiúil, to the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission together with a
deposit of €500. The deposit is returned to the person making the appeal unless the appeal
board decides that the appeal was frivolous (not serious) or vexatious
(intended to cause annoyance).
 
Planning permission

Planning permission is how you ask your local authority to agree to your proposed building work. It can be approved or refused by the local authority. The planning permission process is used to stop inappropriate building and developments and approve those that are suitable.
 
When do I need planning permission?

You will need planning permission if you are going to build a house. You may need planning permission if you want to build an extension or make other changes to your existing house. Some small extensions and conservatories do not need planning permission. You should always check this with your local authority before you start any building.You will also need planning permission if you want to significantly change how you use your land or buildings. For example, you will need planning permission to open a crèche on your property and you may need it if you are renting your property for short-term lets. There are some exceptions to this, for example, you do not need planning permission to change certain vacant commercial properties (including pubs) into homes. These exceptions are set out in the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 to 2021.You may also need planning permission for a modular home or building. This depends on a number of factors such as how big it is, where it will be situated and what it will be used for. A modular home is a home that is built off-site and then delivered and finished at the planned location. These homes are often known as rapid build homes as they are quicker to build. The Government is building rapid build homes in certain locations for families fleeing the war in Ukraine. Planning permission is not needed for this rapid build housing programme, but the Government must take environmental issues into account when choosing locations.Your local authority can advise if you will need planning permission and give you general advice about your application. Your local authority will also be able to tell you whether your proposals are likely to comply with the development plan for your area.What happens if I need planning permission but don’t apply for it or get it?It is an offence to do work that requires planning permission, without having planning permission. This offence can carry very large fines and possible imprisonment. However, if a genuine mistake has been made, it is possible to apply for planning permission to retain an unauthorised development. This permission can be refused, in which case, the unauthorised development will have to be demolished.Types of planning permissionThere are 2 types of planning permission:PermissionOutline permissionThe most common type of planning permission is permission, which is sometimes called full permission. This is where the local authority agrees to your work. Permission is normally subject to conditions, some of which may require changes to your proposals. Planning permission normally lasts for 5 years.Outline permission is where you apply to see if the local authority agrees in principle with you building a house or large extension. When applying for outline permission, you only need certain plans and details about your proposal. You need to produce enough for the planning authority to make a decision about the siting, layout or other proposals for development. Generally, outline permission last for 3 years. If you get outline permission, you will then have to submit detailed drawings and get consequent permission before you start building work.You must not start building before you get planning permission.
 
How much does it cost to apply for planning permission?

You have to pay a fee with your planning application. Different fees apply to different types of development. For example, the current fee for an application to build a house is €65. The fee for a house extension or the conversion of a garage for use as part of a house is €34.
 
Before you apply for planning permission

Before applying for planning permission you must give public notice of your proposals. You do this by:Putting a notice in a local newspaper (your local authority will have a list), andPutting up a site notice that can be clearly seen and readYou will find details of information that must be contained in the notices in the planning application form. Your planning application must be received by the local authority within 2 weeks of the notice appearing in the local newspaper and the site notice going up.Note:The site notice must remain in place for at least 5 weeks from the date of receipt of the planning application. (Note, nine days over Christmas, from 24 December to 1 January, are not taken into account when calculating the 5-week period).
 
How to apply for planning permission

You apply for planning permission by filling in a planning application form and submitting it together with required documents to your local authority.Contact your local authority for advice about how to apply, whether your proposals are likely to comply with the development plan, what other documents you will need, what the fee will be and any other requirements. Information, application form and a checklist are available from your local authority.
 
What happens after I submit my application?

Anyone can make a written submission or observation objecting to or supporting your planning application. It costs €20 to make a submission. Generally, the local planning authority must make a decision on a planning application within 8 weeks of receiving the application, but if the local authority needs more information, or the decision is appealed, it may take much longer. The decision will be notified in writing to you and anyone who commented on your application.If my application is acceptedIf the local authority decides to give you planning permission, you will get a notice of intention to grant planning permission. If no one appeals the decision to An Bord Pleanála within 4 weeks of the date of this decision, you will be granted planning permission from the local authority.If my application is refusedIf the local authority refuses your application, it will give you the reasons for this. You have 4 weeks from the date of this decision to make an appeal to An Bord Pleanála.

Public library services
 

Local authorities run a network of public libraries in Ireland. Public libraries are open to everyone and most of their services are free.You can use some library services without becoming a member.You need to join the library if you want to:Borrow books or other itemsAccess online magazine and newspaper subscriptions, orTake online coursesYou no longer have to pay fines for late returns. All unpaid fines were also cancelled.This page tells you about the services available at a library and how you can become a member.
 
Becoming a member

To become a library member you need to:Fill out the application form online or at any branch.Provide proof of your identity and of your address.Get your parent or guardian’s permission to join the library if you are under 18.You can read about the terms and conditions of library membership.Each library service issues its own library card. You can use any valid public library card to reserve and borrow items from a public library.You get a pin with your membership card when you join the library. You need this number to use the computers and online services.
 
Library services

The services libraries provide differ depending on their size, location and policies. Some of the services available include:Lending servicesMembers can borrow books, CDs, DVDs, audiobooks, e-books, and other materials. Libraries also have many books available in large-print format.Most libraries have a junior section from babies to teenagers.Internet servicesYou can use their computers to access the internet. In some cases, you may need to be a member of your library to use the internet and you may have to book a session in advance. Libraries may offer introductory sessions for new users.PublicationsYou can look up reference books and other materials. Such as dictionaries, directories, encyclopaedias, government publications, business information, yearbooks, and atlases.There are many journals and periodicals. These include national and local newspapers and magazines on a variety of topics. You can also access digital magazines and newspapers online using your library barcode.Online learningThere are over 500 online courses in a variety of subjects for their members. You can access courses through the Universal Class online system.You can access over 60 online language courses. Use the Mango Languages software, which is available on your library's website.Educational support for schools and studentsServices on offer for primary and post-primary schools, for example, class visits to the library. A collection of teaching and learning resources for primary and secondary schools are also available in the Learning Zone section of askaboutIreland.ie.Information servicesYou can get information about services provided by government departments. For example, you get information about social welfare.You can access the national environmental information service (ENFO). You can use this service to find information on the main environmental topics in Ireland.You can get information about the history of your county or locality. For example, county and parish histories, maps, photographs, drawings, old records, and newspapers.You can get information about healthy and attend talks and presentations. This is part of the Healthy Ireland initiative.Business and employment supportsThe Work Matters service at the library can help you look for a job. It can also help you if you are thinking of starting your own business. You can access business publications and work-related e-learning courses. You have access to space for meetings, study, and research.Literacy supportThe Right to Read programme encourages children to read. See how to encourage children to read. Some libraries also offer support to adults who want to improve their literacy.Community groupsPublic libraries often provide a space and support for groups. For example, book clubs, movie clubs and mother and toddler groups. Most libraries know about clubs and societies and events in their locality.Photocopying and printingYour local public library may provide photocopying and printing services.Contact your local library to see what services are available there.Reserves, requests, and renewalsIf the book you want is already out on loan, you can reserve it in your local library. The library will notify you when the book is available. You can also reserve books online using the national library catalogue. You need your library card number and Personal Identification Number (PIN) to do this. If you don't know your PIN, contact your local library.If the library does not have the book you want, you can request it online or at your local library. The library may buy the book or look for a copy through the inter-library loan system. This system lets libraries in Ireland, the UK, and around the world, loan items to each other for their members.Most libraries have a mobile app. You can use this to borrow e-books, access the library catalogue, reserve, and renew books and manage your library account. You can check with your local library if this service is available in your area.You will receive a reminder 3 days before your item is due back at the library. If you would like to keep the item for longer than the length of your loan, you can renew it online, by telephone or in person at the library.
 
Accessing library services

Depending on your age, you can access different collections and services. See the terms and conditions:Adults - Access to all library collections, services and the internet.Child under 12 - Access to the children’s library, to DVDs up to a PG rating, and children’s internet services.Young adults 12-14 - Access to the children’s and young adult library, to DVDs up to a 12 rating, and children’s internet services.Young adults 15-17 - Access to the adult library, to DVDs up to 15 rating, and internet services.Note: Internet services for children vary between libraries. Parents are responsible for their child in the library. This includes your child’s selection and use of library materials and services, including any access to the internet.The number of items you can borrow at any one time and the length of time you can keep them varies. You should ask for details at your local library.You are expected to be quiet in the library as other people may be using the facilities to study, work or read in peace.Generally, you are not allowed to eat or drink in libraries.
 
My Open Libraries

Some libraries have extended their opening hours through the My Open Libraries programme. These libraries are open from 8am to 10pm every day of the year. This extended service is only available to members, and children (under 16) must be accompanied by an adult.During unstaffed hours, an automated service is available, which can be accessed by using your library card and pin.
 
National Library Strategy

There is a library strategy, The library is the place 2023 - 2027. It aims to improve and develop national library services. The strategy will develop library infrastructure, technology, programmes, and services. It aims to:Make sure that everyone who uses the library can join a book club.Get more people to visit the library and libraries to spend more on books every year.Provide outreach library services and mobile libraries, especially in rural areas.Increase the number of My Open Library facilities.Rollout the national Skills for Life programme. It focuses on digital skills, financial literacy, sustainable lifestyles, and environmental awareness.Increase the amount of Irish language materials and services available.
 
Fire services

Fire services respond to emergencies like fires, accidents or any incident
where lives or property are in danger.They are operated under your local
authority with the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage
playing an advisory and policy-making role.Fire services in Ireland are staffed by full-time and part-time, or
retained, firefighters. They provide a 24-hour service.
 
Role of the fire services

Fire services carry out the following:
Respond to fires, road accidents and chemical or hazardous spills
Support the ambulance
    service
Carry out inspections on buildings
Liaise with Building Control Authorities on Fire Safety Certificates
Issue licences for public events
Provide training in fire safety and first aid
Support the Civil Defence in
    providing a reserve
    fire service
Fire Safety CertificateA Fire Safety Certificate (FSC) confirms that a proposed building complies
with legal safety requirements. They are issued by the Building Control
Authority who take advice from senior members of the fire services. They will
ensure that a building’s design has adequate escape facilities and will limit
the spread of a fire.For further information on FSCs and how to apply for one, visit the website
of your
local authority.Building inspectionsMembers
of the fire service can inspect any building within their jurisdiction. They
may ask for any of the following details:
The number of employees or occupants in the building
The purpose of any room or area in the building
The materials used in the building's construction
Any official documents relating to the building's safety
Drawings or plans of the building
If a fire inspector is not satisfied with the safety of a building, they can
make an application to the High Court requesting
the moderation or making safe of the building. They can also ask for
construction to be halted until the issue is resolved.If the High Court grants the order, the property owners must make the
specified alterations.It is an offence to obstruct, impede or refuse entry to a fire inspector.Petrol storageFire services issue licences to those in possession of large amounts of
petrol or dangerous substances. Applicants must submit plans and maps of their
site, and any adjoining sites, to their local authority. Before issuing a
licence, fire services will ensure that all dangerous substances are stored
safely and at a suitable distance from nearby buildings. The Health and Safety
Authority website has more information on the rules around petrol
storage and licences.Fire safety awarenessFire services also raise awareness around fire safety through campaigns on
traditional and social media. They encourage the public to check smoke alarms,
avoid overloaded sockets and to have an escape plan in the event of a fire.National Fire Safety Week runs in
October every year. FundingFire services in Ireland receive funding from three sources:
Government
Commercial rates
Charges
Local authorities are permitted to charge for fire services. Fees may vary
between the different authorities and on the nature of the service provided.

